# 1. The Task of Philosophy

## The Nature of Philosophy as a Cognitive Enterprise

Philosophy may well be something of an acquired taste. For philosophers
not only raise questions and propose answers, but they try to glimpse
behind the curtain of such issues. They want to question the questions
themselves and ask why they are important. And they are not just
satisfied to have an answer but want to know just what it is that makes
an answer correct and appropriate.

Philosophy is identified as one particular human enterprise among others
by its characterizing mission of providing satisfactory answers to the
“big questions” that we have regarding the world’s scheme of things and
our place within it. Often as not, those big questions in philosophy are
*explanatory* questions, questions
whose answers “explain the facts,” thereby enabling us to understand why
things are as they indeed are. The history of philosophy is an ongoing
intellectual struggle to develop ideas that render comprehensible the
seemingly endless diversity and complexity that surrounds us on all
sides. The instruments of philosophizing are the ideational resources of
concepts and theories, and philosophy deploys them in a quest for
understanding, in the endeavor to create an edifice of thought able to
provide us with an intellectual home that affords a habitable shelter in
a complicated and challenging world. As a venture in providing
rationally cogent answers to our questions about large-scale issues
regarding belief, evaluation, and action, philosophy is a sector of the
cognitive enterprise at large. And subsidiarily— since a rational
creature acts on the basis of its beliefs—philosophy also has a bearing
on action, so as to implement the idea of *philoso-phia biou kubernetes—*the motto
of the American Phi Beta Kappa Society, which has it that philosophy is
a guide to life.

Philosophy has no distinctive information sources of its own. It has its
own *problems*, but the *substantive raw materials* by whose
means it develops answers must ultimately come from elsewhere. It thus
has no distinctive subject matter to separate it from other branches of
inquiry and furnishes no novel facts but only offers insights into
relationships. For *everything* is
relevant to its concerns, its tasks being to provide a sort of *expositio mundi*, a traveler’s
guidebook to reality at large. The mission of philosophy is to ask, and
to answer in a rational and disciplined way, all those great questions
about life in this world that people wonder about in their reflective
moments.

In the first book of the *Metaphysics*, Aristotle tells us that
“it is through wonder that men now begin and originally began to
philosophize, wondering in the first place at obvious perplexities, and
then by gradual progression raising question about the greater matters
too, for example, about the origin of the universe.”<sup>1</sup> And
this characterization of the field is right on target. Philosophy
strives after that systematic integration of knowledge that the sciences
initially promised but have never managed to deliver because of their
increasing division of labor and never-ending pursuit of specialized
detail. For what philosophy endeavors (or *should* endeavor) to do is to look at
the sum total of what we know and tell us what it means for us— where
the moral lies (“die Moral von der Geschicht”). Dealing with being and
value in general—with possibility, actuality, and worth— the concerns of
philosophy are universal and all-embracing. And not only is philosophy
too inclusive and all encompassing to have a restricted range of
concern, but it also does not have any altogether distinctive method.
Its procedures of inquiry and reasoning are too varied and diversified,
making use in this endeavor of whatever useful means come to hand for
exclusivity—it takes what it needs from whatever source it can. What
characterizes philosophy is thus neither a special subject matter nor a
special methodology but rather—to reemphasize—its defining mission is
that of coordinating the otherwise available information in the light of
big questions regarding man, the world, and his place within its scheme
of things. Philosophy deals largely with *how* and *whether* and *why* questions: how the world’s
arrangements stand in relation to us, whether things are as they seem,
and why things should be as they are (for example, why it is that we
should do “the ethically right” things). Ever since Socrates pestered
his fellow Athenians with puzzling issues about “obvious” facts
regarding truth and justice, philosophers have probed for the reason why
behind the reason why.

Philosophy’s question-oriented concerns address three sorts of issues in
particular:

-   •* informative* (determining
    what is the case)

-   •* practical* (how to do
    things: how to achieve our aims)

-   •* evaluative/directive* (what
    to aim at)

It is the “big issues” in these three cases with which philosophy
concerns itself. And it must be systematic because it must—for reasons
we shall soon examine more closely—deal with the vast image of issues in
an integrated, consistent, and coherent way. Philosophy is
quintessentially the work of reason. The aim of the enterprise is to
provide rational coherence to our thoughts and rational direction to our
actions.

After all, it is clearly not just answers that we want, but answers
whose tenability can plausibly be established—rationally defensible and
well-substantiated answers. And in particular, this requires that we
transact our question-resolving business in a way that is harmonious
with and does not damage our prephilosophical connections in matters of
everyday life and scientific inquiry. Philosophy’s mandate is to answer
questions in a manner that achieves overall rational coherence so that
the answers we give to some of our questions square with those that we
give to others.

Philosophy is matter of rational inquiry, a cognitive enterprise, a
venture in question-resolution subject to the usual standards of
rationality. In doing philosophy we are committed by the very nature of
the project at hand to maintaining a commitment to the usual ground
rules of cognitive and practical rationality.<sup>2</sup>

To be sure, we are sometimes said to be living in a post-philosophical
age—an era when the practice of philosophy is no longer viable. But this
is absurd. Nowadays more than ever we both desire and require the
guidance of rigorous thinking about the nature of the world and our
place within it. And the provision of such an intellectual orientation
is philosophy’s defining mission. The fact is that the impetus to
philosophy lies in our very nature as rational inquirers: as beings who
have questions, demand answers, and want these answers to be cogent
ones. Cognitive problems arise when matters fail to meet our
expectations, and the expectation of rational order is the most
fundamental of them all. The fact is simply that we *must *philosophize; it is a situational
imperative for a rational creature.

## The Need for Philosophy: Humans as *Homo quaerens*

At the basis of the cognitive enterprise lies the fact of human
curiosity rooted in the need-to-know of a weak and vulnerable creature
emplaced in a difficult and often hostile environment in which it must
make its evolutionary way by its wits. For we must act—our very survival
depends upon it—and a rational animal must align its actions with its
beliefs. We have a very real and material stake in securing viable
answers to our questions as to how things stand in the world we live in.

The discomfort of unknowing is a natural human sentiment. To be ignorant
of what goes on about one is unpleasant to the individual and dangerous
to the species from an evolutionary point of view. As William James
wisely observed:

The utility of this emotional affect of expectation is perfectly
obvious; “natural selection,” in fact, was bound to bring it about
sooner or later. It is of the utmost practical importance to an animal
that he should have prevision of the qualities of the objects that
surround him.<sup>3</sup>

There is good reason why we humans pursue knowledge—it is our
evolutionary destiny. Humans have evolved within nature to fill the
ecological niche of an intelligent being. We are neither numerous and
prolific (like the ant and the termite), nor tough and aggressive (like
the shark). Weak and vulnerable creatures, we are constrained to make
our evolutionary way in the world by the use of brainpower. It is by
knowledge and not by hard shells or sharp claws or keen teeth that we
have carved out our niche in evolution’s scheme of things. The demand
for understanding, for a cognitive accommodation to one’s environment,
for “knowing one’s way about,” is one of the most fundamental
requirements of the human condition. Our *questions *form a big part of our
life’s agenda, providing the impetus that gives rise to our knowledge—or
putative knowledge—of the world. Our species is *Homo quaerens*. We have questions and
want (nay, *need*) answers.

In situations of cognitive frustration and bafflement we cannot function
effectively as the sort of creature nature has compelled us to become.
Confusion and ignorance—even in such “remote” and “abstruse” matters as
those with which philosophy deals—yield psychic dismay and discomfort.
The old saying is perfectly true: philosophy bakes no bread. But it is
also no less true that man does not live by bread alone. The physical
side of our nature that impels us to eat, drink, and be merry is just
one of its sides. *Homo sapiens*
require nourishment for the mind as urgently as nourishment for the
body. We seek knowledge not only because we wish, but because we must.
For us humans, the need for information, for knowledge to nourish the
mind, is every bit as critical as the need for food to nourish the body.
Cognitive vacuity or dissonance is as distressing to us as hunger or
pain. We want and need our cognitive commitments to comprise an
intelligible story, to give a comprehensive and coherent account of
things. Bafflement and ignorance—to give suspensions of judgment the
somewhat harsher name they deserve—exact a substantial price from us.
The quest for cognitive orientation in a difficult world represents a
deeply practical requisite for us. The basic demand for information and
understanding presses in upon us, and we must do (and are pragmatically
justified in doing) what is needed for its satisfaction. For us,
cognition is the most practical of matters. Knowledge itself fulfills an
acute practical need. And this is where philosophy comes in, in its
attempt to grapple with our basic cognitive concerns.

Philosophy seeks to bring rational order, system, and intelligibility to
the confusing diversity of our cognitive affairs. It strives for orderly
arrangements in the cognitive sphere that will enable us to find our way
about in the world in an effective and satisfying way. Philosophy is
indeed a venture in theorizing, but one whose rationale is eminently
practical. A rational animal that has to make its evolutionary way in
the world by its wits has a deep-rooted need for speculative reason.

But why pursue rationalizing philosophy at all—why accept this
enterprise as an arena of appropriate human endeavor? The answer is that
it is an integral and indispensable component of the larger project of
rational inquiry regarding issues important to us humans. This, to be
sure, simply pushes the question back: why pursue reasoned inquiry? And
this question splits into two components.

The first component is: Why pursue *inquiry*? Why insist on knowing about
things and understanding them? The answer is twofold. On the one hand,
knowledge is its own reward. And on the other hand, knowledge is the
indispensable instrument for the more efficient and effective
realization of other goals. We accordingly engage in philosophical
inquiry because we must; because those great intellectual issues of man
and his place in the world’s scheme, of the true and the beautiful and
the good, of right and wrong, freedom and necessity, causality and
determinism, and so on, matter greatly to us—to all of us some of the
time and to some of us all of the time. We philosophize because it is
important to us to have answers to our questions. After all, a
philosophical work is neither a work of fiction nor a work of history.
Its mission is not so much to enlighten or to inform as to persuade: to
convince people of the appropriateness of a certain solution to a
certain problem. What is at issue is, at bottom, an exercise in question
resolution—in problem solving. Its roots are in human curiosity—in the
“facts of life,” that we have questions and may need to obtain
cognitively satisfying answers to them.

The second component of our question is: why *reasoned* inquiry? The answer is that
we are *Homo sapiens*, a *rational* animal. We do not want just
answers, but answers that can satisfy the demands of our
intelligence—answers that we can in good conscience regard as
appropriate, as tenable, and defensible. We are not content with
information about which answers people would like to have
(psychologism), nor with information about what sort of answers are
available (possibility mongering). What we want is cogent guidance
regarding which answers to *adopt*—which contentions are correct
or, at any rate, plausible. And reason affords our prime standard in
this regard.

Philosophy, then, is an inquiry that seeks to resolve problems arising
from the incoherence of the matter of our extraphilosophical
commitments. And to abandon philosophy is to rest content with
incoherence. One can, of course, cease to do philosophy (and this is
what sceptics of all persuasions have always wanted). But if one is
going to philosophize at all, one has no alternative but to proceed by
means of arguments and inferences, the traditional vehicles of human
rationality.

Yet, why pursue such a venture in the face of the all too evident
possibility of error? Why run such cognitive risks? For it is only too
clear that there *are* risks here.
In philosophizing, there is a gap between the individual indications at
our disposal and the answers to our questions that we decide to accept.
(As there also is in science— but in philosophy the gap is far wider
because the questions are of a different scale.) Because of this, the
positions we take have to be held tentatively, subject to expectation of
an almost certain need for amendment, qualification, improvement, and
modification. Philosophizing in the classical manner—exploiting the
available indications of experience to answer those big questions on the
agenda of traditional philosophy—is predicated on the use of reason to
do the best we can to align our cognitive commitments with the substance
of our experience. In this sense, philosophizing involves an act of
faith: when we draw on our experience to answer our questions we have to
proceed in the tentative hope that the best we can do is good enough, at
any rate, for our immediate purposes.

The question of intellectual seriousness is pivotal here. Do we care? Do
we *really want* answers to our
questions? And are we sufficiently committed to this goal to be willing
to take risks for the sake of its achievement—risks of potential error,
of certain disagreement, and of possible philistine incomprehension? For
these risks are un-avoidable—an ineliminable part of the philosophical
venture. If we lose the sense of legitimacy and become too fainthearted
to run such risks, we must pay the price of abandoning the inquiry.

This of course can be done. But to abandon the quest for answers in a
*reasoned* way is impossible. For
in the final analysis there is no alternative to philosophizing as long
as we remain in the province of reason. We adopt some controversial
position or other, no matter which way we turn—no matter how elaborately
we try to avoid philosophical controversy—it will come back to haunt us.
The salient point was already well put by Aristotle: “\[Even if we join
those who believe that philosophizing is not possible\] in this case too
we are obliged to inquire how it is possible for there to be no
Philosophy; and then, in inquiring, we philosophize, for rational
inquiry is the essence of Phi-losophy.”<sup>4</sup> To those who are
prepared simply to abandon philosophy, to withdraw from the whole
project of trying to make sense of things, we can have nothing to say.
(How can one reason with those who deny the point and propriety of
reasoning?) But with those who *argue*for its abandonment we can do something—once we have enrolled
them in the community as fellow theorists with a position of their own.
F. H. Bradley hit the nail on the head: “The man who is ready to prove
that metaphysical knowledge is impossible . . . is a brother
metaphysician with a rival theory of first principles.”<sup>5</sup> One
can abandon philosophy, but one cannot *advocate* its abandonment through
rational argumentation without philosophizing.

The question, “should we philosophize?” accordingly receives a
straightforward answer: the impetus to philosophize lies in our very
nature as rational inquirers. We must philosophize; it is a situational
imperative for a rational creature such as ourselves.

## Rationality is the Instrument of Philosophy

The ancients saw man as “the rational animal,” set apart from other
creatures by capacities for speech and deliberation. Under the precedent
of Greek philosophy, Western thinkers have generally deemed the use of
thought for the guidance of our proceedings to be at once the glory and
the duty of *Homo sapiens*.

Rationality consists in the intelligent pursuit of appropriate ends. It
calls for the appropriate use of reason to resolve choices in the best
possible way. To behave rationally is to make use of one’s intelligence
to figure out the best thing to do in the circumstances. It is a matter
of the recognizably effective pursuit of appropriately appreciated
benefits. Rationality thus has a crucially economic dimension, seeing
that the impetus to economize is an inherent part of intelligent
comportment. Rationality is a matter of deliberately doing the best one
can with the means at one’s disposal—of striving for the best results
that one can expect to achieve within the range of one’s
re-sources—specifically including one’s intellectual resources.
Optimization in what one thinks, does, and values is the crux of
rationality. Costs and benefits are the pivotal factors. Be it in
matters of belief, action, or evaluation, rationality demands a
deliberate endeavor to optimize benefits relative to the expenditure of
available resources. Reason requires the cultivation of intelligently
adopted objectives in intelligent ways.

Rationality is not an inevitable feature of conscious organic life. Here
on earth, at least, it is our specifically human instrumentality, a
matter of our particular evolutionary heritage. Rational
intel-ligence—the use of our brains to guide action by figuring out what
is the apparent best—is the survival instrument of our species, in much
the same way that other creatures have managed to ensure their survival
by being prolific, or tough, or well sheltered. It is a means to
adaptive efficiency, enabling us—sometimes at least—to adjust our
environment to our needs and wants rather than conversely.

The maintenance of rational coherence and consistency is a key task of
philosophy. But is such consistency itself not simply a mere ornament, a
dispensable luxury, the hobgoblin of little minds? Rousseau wrote to one
of his correspondents that he did not wish to be shackled by
narrow-minded consistency—he proposed to write whatever seemed sensible
at the time. In a writer of belles lettres, this sort of flexibility may
seem refreshingly open-minded. But such an approach is not available to
a philosopher. Philosophy in its very nature is a venture of
systematization and rationalization—of rendering matters intelligible
and accessible to rational thought. Its concern is for the rational
order and systemic coherence of our commitments. The commitment to
rational coherence is a part of what makes philosophy the enterprise it
is.

But why not embrace contradiction in a spirit of openness rather than
flee from it?<sup>6</sup> The answer is that rejecting inconsistencies
is the only road to comprehension and understanding. To the extent that
we do not resolve an issue in one definite way to the exclusion of
others, we do not resolve it at all. Only a coherent,
alternative-excluding resolution is a resolution at all. Moreover,
intelligence has, for us, an evolutionary dimension, and only a
consistent and coherent mode of action can provide for evolutionary
efficacy.

The presence of an inconsistency in framing an answer to a question is
self-destructive. To respond “yes *and* no” is in effect to offer no
response at all; answers that do not *exclude* manage to achieve no useful
*inclusions* either. Only where
some possibilities are denied is anything asserted: “All determination
is negation” (*omnis afflrmatio est negatio*). A logically inconsistent theory of something is thereby
self-defeating—not just because it affirms an impossibility but because
it provides no information on the matter at issue. An inconsistent
“position” is no position at all. Keeping on good terms with *all* the possibilities requires that we
embrace none. But the point of having a position at all is to have some
answer to some question or other. If we fail to resolve the problem in
favor of one possibility or another, we do not have an answer. To
whatever extent we fail to resolve the issue in favor of one alternative
or another, we also fail to arrive at some answer to the question.
Ubiquitous yea-saying is socially accommodating but informatively
unhelpful. (Compare Aristotle’s defense of the law of noncontradiction
in Book Gamma of the *Metaphysics*.) As long as and to the
extent that inconsistencies remain, our goal of securing information or
achieving understanding is defeated.

To be sure, while we ever strive to *improve* our knowledge, we never manage
to *perfect* it. The stage for our
present deliberations is itself set by a trio of individually plausible
but collectively incompatible theses represented by the inconsistent
triad:

-   1\. Reality is knowable. (Thought can adequately characterize
    reality—not fully, to be sure, but at any rate in essentials.)

-   2\. Our knowledge of reality is consistent; it constitutes a
    logically “coherent whole.” Rational inquiry can in principle depict
    reality adequately in a coherent system of true propositions.

-   3\. Experience shows that our ventures at devising knowledge of
    reality eventually run into inconsistency as we work out their
    ramifications and implications more fully.

Such an aporetic cluster of inconsistent plausibilities comes to be
resolved by abandoning one of the theses involved.

Now denial of thesis 3 is not a promising option here, since, to all
appearances, this simply represents a “fact of life” regarding the
situation in philosophy. Rejecting 2 also has its problems. Perhaps it
is conceivable (just barely) that reality will, whenever offered a
choice of alternatives, decide to have it both ways and accept
inconsistency—a prospect envisaged by thinkers from the days of Nicholas
of Cusa to contemporary neo-Hegelians. This is a theory that we might,
in the end, feel compelled to adopt. But clearly only as a last resort,
“at the end of the day”—and thus effectively never. In philosophy, we
want to make sense of things. A theory that says they just cannot be
made sense of coherently and consistently may well have various merits,
but it is nevertheless decisively flawed. Its defect is not just a lack
of rationality but a lack of utility as well. For such a theory simply
aborts the aim of the cognitive enterprise—it impedes any prospect of
gathering information.

And so, denying thesis 1 affords the most readily available option. We
must concede that philosophical thought can at best make a rough and
imperfect approximation of adequacy—that reality refuses cognitive
domestication, so that our best cognitive efforts represent a valiant
but never totally satisfactory attempt to “get it right.” Such a
position is not a radical scepticism that denies the availability of any
and all useful information about reality, but a mitigated scepticism
that insists that thought at best affords rough information about
reality—not by way of definitive and indefeasible *episteme*, but by way of a “rational
belief” that is inevitably imperfect and defective (its rationality
notwithstanding). An element of tentativeness should always attend our
philosophical theories—we can never rest assured that they will not need
to be revamped and shored up by our successors (quite to the contrary,
we can count on it!).

As this line of thought indicates, two basic goals set the scene for
philosophical inquiry: (i) the urge to know, to secure answers to our
questions, to enhance our cognitive resources, to enlarge our
information, to extend the range of accepted theses, to fill up an
intellectual vacuum. But this in the nature of the case—given the
character of its “data”—inexorably leads to over-commitment, to
informational overcrowding, to inconsistency. And now comes (ii), the
urge to rationality: to have a coherent theory, to keep our commitments
consistent and harmoniously coordinated. The first impetus is expansive
and ampliative, the second contractive and eliminative. Both point in
the direction of systematization, with its characteristic concern for
comprehensiveness and harmonization.

*Philosophy as Truth Estimation*

As a venture in rational inquiry, philosophy seeks for the best
available, the “rationally optimal,” answers to our
information-in-handtranscending questions about how matters stand in the
world. And experience-based conjecture—theorizing, if you will—is the
most promising available instrument for question resolution in the face
of imperfect information. It is a tool for use by finite intelligences,
providing them not with the best *possible* answer (in some rarified
sense of this term), but with the best *available* answer, the putative best
that one can manage to secure in the actually existing conditions in
which we do and must conduct our epistemic labors.

In philosophy, as elsewhere throughout the domain of estimation, one
confronts an inevitable risk of error. This risk takes two forms. On the
one hand, we face errors of commission in possibly accepting what is
false. On the other hand, we face errors of omission by failing to
accept what is true. Like any other cognitive enterprise, philosophy has
to navigate the difficult passage between ignorance and mistakes.

Two equally unacceptable extremes offer themselves at this stage. That
first is to accept nothing, to fall into pervasive scepticism. Here we
achieve a total exemption from errors of commission—but unfortunately do
so at the expense of endless errors of omission. The other extreme is to
fall into pervasive gullibility, to accept pretty much everything that
is put before us. Here we achieve a total exemption from errors of
omission—but unfortunately do so at the expense of maximal errors of
commission. In philosophy, as in other branches of rational inquiry, we
must strive for the best available middle way—the best available
balance. Though we realize that there are no guarantees, we do desire
and require reasonable estimates.

The need for such an estimative approach is easy to see. After all, we
humans live in a world not of our making where we have to do the best we
can with the limited means at our disposal. We must recognize that there
is no prospect of assessing the truth—or presumptive truth—of claims (be
they philosophical or scientific) independently of the use of our
imperfect mechanisms of inquiry and systematization. And here it is
*estimation* that affords the best
means for doing the job. We are not—and presumably will never be—in a
position to stake totally secure claims to the definitive truth
regarding those great issues of philosophical interest. But we certainly
can—and indeed must—do the best we can to achieve a reasonable *estimate* of the truth. We can and do
*aim* at the truth in our
inquiries, even in circumstances where we cannot make foolproof
pretensions to its attainment, and where we have no alternative but to
settle for the *best available estimate* of the truth of the matter—that estimate for which the
best case can be made, according to the appropriate standards of
rational cogency.

Yet despite those guarding qualifications about feasibility and
practicability, the “best available” answer at issue here is intended in
a rather strong sense. We want not just an “answer” of some sort, but a
viable and acceptable answer—one whose tenability we are willing to
commit ourselves to. The rational conjecture at issue is not to be a
product of *mere guesswork,* but
one of *responsible estimation* in
a strict sense of the term. It is not *just* an estimate of the true answer
that we want, but an estimate that is sensible and defensible: *tenable*, in short. We may need to
resort to more information than is actually given, but we do not want to
make it up “out of thin air.” The provision of reasonable warrant for
rational assurance is the object of the enterprise. Rational inquiry is
a matter of doing no more—but also no less—than the best we can manage
to realize in its prevailing epistemic circumstances. Nevertheless, the
fact remains that the rationally indicated answer does in fact afford
our most promising estimate of the true answer—that for whose acceptance
as true the optimal overall case be constructed in the circumstances at
hand.

Now with regard to those “big issues” that constitute the agenda of
philosophy, the systematization of otherwise available information is
the best policy. And *systematization* in the context of the
available background information is nothing other than the process for
making out this rationally best case. It is thus rational conjecture as
based on and emerging from systematic considerations that is the key
method of philosophical inquiry, affording our best hope for obtaining
cogent answers to the questions that confront us in this domain. Let us
consider more closely just what is involved here.

*The Data of Philosophy*

In philosophizing we strive for rational coherence in achieving answers
to our questions. But how is one to proceed in this venture? It is clear
that here, as in other branches of inquiry, we begin with data.

Neither individually nor collectively do we humans begin our cognitive
quest empty handed, equipped with only a blank tablet. Be it as single
individuals or as entire generations, we always begin with a diversified
cognitive heritage, falling heir to the great mass of information and
misinformation of our predecessors—one must extend it. What William
James called our “funded experience” of the world’s ways—of its nature
and our place within it—constitute the *data* at philosophy’s disposal in its
endeavor to accomplish its question-resolving work. These specifically
include:

-   • Common-sense beliefs, common knowledge, and what have been “the
    ordinary convictions of the plain man” since time immemorial;

-   • The facts (or purported facts) afforded by the science of the day;
    the views of well-informed “experts” and “authorities”;

-   • The lessons we derive from our dealings with the world in everyday
    life;

-   • The received opinions that constitute the worldview of the day;
    views that accord with the “spirit of the times” and the ambient
    convictions of one’s cultural context;

-   • Tradition, inherited lore, and ancestral wisdom (including
    religious tradition);

-   • The “teachings of history,” as best we can discern them.

There is no clear limit to the scope of philosophy’s potentially useful
data. The lessons of human experience in all of its cognitive dimensions
afford the materials of philosophy. No plausible source of information
about how matters stand in the world fails to bring grist to the mill.
The whole range of the (purportedly) established “facts of experience”
furnishes the extra-philosophical inputs for our philoso-phizing—the
potentially usable materials, as it were, for our philosophical
reflections.

And all of these data have much to be said for them: common sense,
tradition, general belief, and plausible prior theorizing—the sum total
of the different sectors of “our experience.” They all merit
consideration: all exert some degree of cognitive pressure in having a
claim upon us. Yet, while those data deserve respect, they do not
deserve acceptance. And they certainly do not constitute established
knowledge. There is nothing sacred and sacrosanct about them. For, taken
as a whole, the data are too much for tenability—collectively they
generally run into conflicts and contradictions. The long and short of
it is that the data of philosophy constitute a plethora of fact (or
purported fact) so ample as to threaten to sink any ship that carries so
heavy a cargo. The constraint they put upon us is thus not peremptory
and absolute—they do not represent certainties to which we must cling to
at all costs. Even the plainest of “plain facts” can be questioned, as
indeed some of them must be, since in the aggregate they are
collectively inconsistent.

And this is the condition of philosophy’s data in general. For the
philosopher, nothing is absolutely sacred. The difficulty is—and always
has been—that the data of philosophy afford an embarrassment of riches.
They engender a situation of cognitive over-commitment within which
inconsistencies arise. For they are not only manifold and diversified
but invariably yield discordant results. Taken altogether in their grand
totality, the data are inconsistent. And here philosophy finds its work
cut out for it.

In philosophy, we cannot accept all those “givens” as certified facts
that must be endorsed wholly and unqualifiedly. Every datum is
defeasible. Anything might, in the final analysis, have to be abandoned,
whatever its source: science, common sense, common knowledge, the whole
lot. Those data are not truths but only plausibilities. Nothing about
them is immune to criticism and possible rejection; everything is
potentially at risk. One recent theorist writes: “No philosophical, or
any other, theory can provide a view which violates common sense and
remain logically consistent. For the truth of common sense is assumed by
all theories.... This necessity to con

form to common sense establishes a constraint upon the interpretations
philosophical theories can offer.”<sup>7</sup> But this is very
problematic. The landscape of philosophical history is littered with
theories that tread common sense underfoot. There are no sacred cows in
philosophy—common sense least of all. As philosophy goes about its work
of rendering our beliefs coherent, something to which we are deeply
attached will have to give, and we can never say at the outset where the
blow will or will not fall. Systemic considerations may in the end lead
to difficulties at any point.

For these data do indeed all have some degree of merit and, given our
cognitive situation, it would be very convenient if they turned out to
be true. Philosophy cannot simply turn its back on these data without
further ado. Its methodology must be one of damage control and salvage.
For as regards those data, it should always be our goal to save as much
as we coherently can.

*Metaphilosophical Issues*

To this point, the tenor of the discussion has been to offer a series of
assertions along the lines of: this is what philosophy is; this is what
philosophy does; this is how philosophizing works. But what justifies
this way of talking? What reason is there to think that matters indeed
stand as claimed?

This is a question that can, in the final analysis, be answered only
*genetically*, by linking the
response to and duly coordinating it with the historical facts about how
philosophizing has actually been carried on over the years. What
philosophy is all about is not writ large in the lineaments of theory,
but it is something that must be gleaned from the inspectable realities
of philosophical practice. And so, while the history of physics may be
largely irrelevant for physicists, the history of philosophy is
unavoidably relevant for philosophers. What philosophers *should* do has to emerge from a
critical analysis of what philosophers *have been* doing. The history of
philosophy is not a part of philosophy, but philosophy cannot get on
without it.

All the same, it is lamentable that now, more than two hundred years
later, there are still philosophers whose modus operandi invites Kant’s
classic complaint (at the start of the introduction of the *Prolegomena*) that “there are scholarly
men for whom the history of philosophy (both ancient and modern) is
philosophy itself.” For the fact is that philosophy and history of
philosophy *address different questions*—in the former instance, what is the case about an
issue, and in the latter, what someone, *X,* thought to be the case. To address
the former question we must speak on our own account. A philosopher
cannot be a commission agent trading in the doctrines of others; in the
final analysis he or she must deal on his or her own account. There must
be a shift from “*X* thinks that
*A* is the answer to the question
*Q*” to the position that we
ourselves are prepared to endorse for substantively cogent reasons. No
amount of exposition and clarification regarding the thought of *X* and of *Y* will themselves answer the question
on our agenda. To do so, we must decide not what people thought or meant
but what is correct with respect to the issues. And so while the history
of philosophy is indeed an indispensable instrument of philosophy—in a
science of concepts, ideas, problems, issues, theories, and so on—these
are no more than *data* for our
philosophizing. Actually to philosophize we must do more than note and
consolidate such data, we must appraise and evaluate them on our own
account. Philosophers must speak for themselves and conduct their
business on their own account. They cannot hide themselves behind what
*X *thinks or what *Y* thinks, but must in the end present
a position of their own with respect to *what is to be thought*. The history of
philosophy is not—and cannot be—a substitute for philosophy itself.

Nevertheless, the fact is that metaphilosophy—the study of the nature
and methodology of the discipline—is also an integral component of
philosophy. Unlike the situation with chemistry or with physiology,
questions about the nature of philosophy belong to the discipline
itself. And so, these questions about methodology cannot really be
resolved by recourse to some sort of philosophy-neutral methodology.
Only at the end of the day—only when we have pursued our philosophical
inquiries to an adequate stage of development—will it become possible to
see, with the wisdom of a more synoptic hindsight, as it were, that the
selection of a methodological starting point was in fact proper and
appropriate. It is part and parcel of the coherentist nature of
philosophical method that our analysis must issue in smoothly
self-supportive cycles and climates. Circularity in philosophical
argumentation is not necessarily vicious. On the contrary, it can and
should exhibit the ultimately self-sustaining nature of rational inquiry
at large. Herein lies a key part of the reason why philosophy must be
developed systematically—that is, as a system.

If you cannot fit your philosophical contentions into a smooth systemic
unison with what you otherwise know then there is something seriously
amiss with them. To be sure, this does not mean that the discussion will
not, here and there, be projected into contentions that are
controversial and seemingly eccentric. For sometimes the best reason for
adopting a controversial and apparently strange thesis is that it
contributes significantly to the systemic coordination of the familiar
by serving to unify and rationalize a mass of material, much of which
seems comparatively unproblematic. For example, our basic thesis that
philosophy exists to make sense of the things we know is far from being
a philosophical truism. But that does not preclude its ultimate
appropriations.

The cardinal task of philosophy is thus to impart systemic order into
the domain of relevant data; to render them consistent, compatible, and
smoothly coordinated. Its commitment to instilling harmonious coherence
into the manifold of our putative knowledge means that systematization
is the prime and principal instrument of philosophical methodology. One
might, in fact, define philosophy as the rational systematization of our
thoughts on basic issues—the “basic principles” of our understanding of
the world and our place within it. We become involved in philosophy in
our endeavor to make systemic sense of the extraphilosophical
“facts”—when we try to answer those big questions by systematizing what
we think we know about the world, pushing our “knowledge” to its
ultimate conclusions, and combining items usually kept in convenient
separation. Philosophy is the policeman of thought, as it were, the
agent for maintaining law and order in our cognitive endeavors.
