# 10. By Whose Standards?

## Retrospective Condemnation

How far do our ethical and evaluative standards reach across the divides
of space and time? Can we appropriately judge people remote from our own
setting by the criteria we would apply locally, in our own
spatiotemporal proximity?

This discussion will argue against “presentism” and “localism”— the idea
that we should judge others by our own standards and that our norms
project all-embracingly across the reaches of time and place.

One of the many problematic aspects of the “political correctness” that
has become so fashionable in this turn of the century is the tendency to
condemn and disparage various individuals or groups from earlier eras
for having values, opinions, and customs that our own times do not
approve. The myriad available examples include:

-   • Condemning the Founding Fathers for their acceptance of slavery

-   • Condemning the politicians of the 1890-1920 era for their
    resistance to women’s suffrage

-   • Condemning the industrialists of the nineteenth century for their
    willingness to employ child labor

Everyone will agree that people should not be inappropriately exploited,
but is indentured service inappropriate exploitation? Everyone will
agree that all serious stakeholders should have a say in public affairs,
but are those who, like women and children, owe the state neither taxes
nor military service serious stakeholders? Everyone will agree that
children should not be exploited, but is offering them a chance to
contribute to their family through gainful employment exploitation?
There is always a gap between high-level principles and concrete
conditions that leaves room for further questions.

And in this regard, a case can be made for rejecting the practice of
assessing the actions and agents of the past by our own standards. For
adjudging their ethical standing and moral status as good or bad, benign
or evil, in the light of our current standards is something highly
problematic from the angle of rationality and questionable from that of
justice.

## Norms and Belief

How, after all, could we reasonably expect people of distant times and
places to adopt our practices and conform to our standards? The
condemnation of eighteenth-century agents for failing to act on
twenty-first-century ethical norms makes about as much sense as
reproving eighteenth-century generals for failing to employ
twenty-first-century strategies or judging medieval cartographers by
twentieth-century norms.

In this regard, one cannot but heed the parallelism between the
cognitive and the evaluative situation. Clearly, we cannot reproach the
physicists of the eighteenth century for not employing twentiethcentury
standards and practices, nor even lay fault at the door of the physician
of a decade ago for not conforming to the norms that subsequent
discovery has made standard at the present.

Of course they could and did see matters differently because they viewed
them from a different angle of vision—one that is different from ours
because ours was simply not available to them.

A look at the intellectual landscape of these times shows all too
clearly that many of us are deeply enmeshed in a normative egocentrism
that leads us to view those of earlier times, who do not share the
“enlightened” standards of our day, as being if not willfully evil then
at least ethically blind. As many see it, the benighted folk of the past
must simply have realized that it is wrong to exclude women from the
vote, Asians from the immigration quota, Jews from the social clubs,
homosexuals from military service, and the like. How can they have
failed to see that inequality is unfair and ipso facto wicked?

And of course if those discriminatory practices were no more than
unreasoned prejudice this view would be entirely correct. But that is
assuredly not how it was. Be it right or wrong, those “wicked
malefactors” of the past had, or thought they had, perfectly good
reasons for their discriminatory practices—reasons that to them seemed
every bit as good as our excluding child abusers from schoolmasters’
posts or alcoholics from bus driving. For the most part, at least, they
acted not out of an unthinking antagonism to these groups, but out of a
conviction that allowing them entry into those prohibited categories
would be significantly harmful to legitimate social interests. On the
whole, their mind-set was not evil and their motives were not—or need
not have been—outright wicked. They acted under the guidance of the good
(*sub ratione boni*). They may
have been—and doubtless were—mistaken in those beliefs, but even so the
fact remains that the faults at issue were of intellect and
understanding, not of character. And it is no more valid to reprehend
such past misunderstandings than it would be to reprehend the
misunderstandings of the eighteenth-century physicians who sought to
treat gout by salt cures.

## Who Appointed Us as Arbiter?

After all, who or what has appointed us as the supreme arbiter? Where is
it written that our own standards are universally authoritative? We look
down our ethical noses at these benighted legislators of
seventeenth-century England who mandated drastic penalties for such
minor offenses as petty theft. But where will we ourselves stand in the
sight of a posterity that may well come to regard our practices in
regard to abortion as nothing but casual infanticide? Our own standards
should of course be seen as compelling for us—for evaluating what we
ourselves and our contemporaries do here and now. If we did not see them
in this light, then they just would not be “our standards.” But with
what right or justification can we see them as compelling for other
times and places? How could we validate a normative egocentrism that
elevates our present standards of judgment to a position of universal
supremacy? What justifies a normative Ptol-emaicism that puts us at the
center of the evaluative universe?

## The Agent, the Act, and the Action

A pivotal distinction must be heeded here, namely that between the moral
assessment of a generic sort of act on the one hand, and on the other
hand its performance in the particular action of a particular agent on a
particular occasion. The questions, “Should we approve someone’s
performing that action here and now?” and “Should one think ill of
someone who performed the action then and there?” pose very different
issues—and they require different answers. Consider polygamy. Clearly we
do—quite rightly—see it is a wrongful and unacceptable practice. But by
this we do—or should—mean to condemn its performance here and now by
people of this time and place in our own existential setting. We would
and should quite properly condemn someone among our contemporary
neighbors who commits this type of act. But it would certainly be
morally obtuse of us if we were to comparatively condemn the biblical
Abraham. Our disapproval of polygamy cannot reasonably be directed at
*his* polygamy simply because the
conditions and circumstances of its occurrence—the setting of
circumstances and values in which it oc-curred—was utterly different
from our own and relates to evaluative considerations that this
patriarch did not and could not have had any inkling of at all. We can
and should judge the abstract practice—the generic mode of action—by our
own standards and according to our own lights. But this proceeds at the
generic level of the abstract, not at the specific level of the
concrete, and there it is only sensible and just to judge remote agents
and acts by their standards—those that prevail in their particular
settings and circumstances. Accordingly, we can—and should—disapprove of
those acts in general without thereby derogating those remote agents and
impugning their morals.

An important theoretical distinction is called for. In evaluating
general practice, it is only right and proper that we should do so by
our own lights—our own standards and values, those that we take
ourselves to be proper and correct. But in evaluating the actions of
people of another time and place, we should manifest urbanity, avoiding
the parochialism of imposing our own standards and be willing to apply
those of the agent’s own time and place. After all, different issues are
at stake, and here, as elsewhere, different questions can require
different answers.

## What Can Reasonably Be Expected?

When engaged in evaluating the moral or ethical condition of someone
from another time and place, it is only sensible to ask: “What is
reasonable to expect of this individual?” And obviously that they should
conform to the norms and values of *our* place and time is simply *not* a reasonable expectation. How
could those remote individuals possibly be expected to adopt and conform
to those as yet unarticulated values and unknown standards? Where are
they to get a crystal ball that would enable them to discern the
substantially indiscernible evaluative future?

We can, in principle, operate in matters of judgment and evaluation in
relation to the action and merits of people who are remote in time and
setting in terms of

-   1.* our own* personal
    standards

-   2\. the general standards of *our* time and place (our social
    context)

-   3\. the general standards of *their* time and place (their social
    context).

Here, (2) is unsuitable because it would require people to act on the
basis of considerations entirely outside the scope of their knowledge
and understanding. And (1) is inappropriate both for the same reason,
and because it asks of people more than could ever reasonably be
expected of them. For only (3)—the one and only remaining
al-ternative—is practicable in this connection. For only the abstract
act can rightly be judged by us according to our own standards and not
its performance by some remote agents. To make one’s moral assessment of
the people and actions of another place and time in line with one’s own
values and standards is to proceed in a way that is clearly parochial,
urbanity deficient, and narrow-minded. And it is also unjust because it
calls for expecting of someone something that they could not possibly
manage to achieve. We might perhaps hope that people will look beyond
the baseline of a normative localism, and we would certainly welcome
their doing so, but we have no right to expect it of them.

That the reach of one’s obligations do not outrun the limits of the
possible has been a legal maxim since Roman times (*Ultra posse nemo obligatur*). And at
the base of the matter lies the issue of rationality. After all, it is
absurd to ever ask for something that exceeds the limits of the
possible. And exactly this principle regarding legal obligation holds
good for moral obligation as well. That which lies beyond a person’s
powers due to conditions that the conditional individual is nowise
responsible for is something for which they cannot bear reasonable
reprehension. Justifiable reproach stops at the limits of effective
responsibility. And for this reason, if no other, applying unavailable
standards would be both unreasonable and unjust.

## A Kantian Perspective

As Immanuel Kant already insisted long ago, the pivotal factor in the
moral assessment of an agent’s actions pivots on this agent’s motives
for doing it.<sup>1</sup> The performance of even an inherently
meritorious action (helping someone in need) can be reprehensible if
done for an unsavory motive (seeking praise), and even an inherently
wrongful action (inflicting pain on someone) can be meritorious if done
for a benign motive (saving his life in a medical procedure). And while
loyalty to the values and practices of our time and place is in ordinary
circumstances appropriate and thereby should in general motivate *our* actions, those of the agents of
the past are going to depend on the norms of *their* day because only these norms can
possibly play a role in their motivation.

What is inappropriate about judging people and their acts by standards
other than their own is that these are not *available* to them. Only the norms of
their time and place are accessible to individuals and able to canalize
their doings and dealings. It is inappropriate to bring other norms to
bear because it is irrational to demand that an agent should govern
their doings by considerations outside their ken.

When considering what we take to be the misdeeds of the people of other
times and places we are certainly entitled

-   • to disapprove of what they thought and did, and

-   • to regret that they did it

But we are not comparably entitled

-   • to condemn them for the thinking and doing of it.

We must in this context keep in view a clear separation between the act
and the agent, and we cannot automatically transmute disapproval of the
act into condemnation of the agent.

To justly engage the actions of an agent we have to take that agent’s
thought and motives into account. And when looking at what we disapprove
of in the deeds of people of other places and times, we often cannot get
around the fact that—to put it crudely—they just didn’t know any better.
An agent of the past no more deserves automatic condemnation as wicked
for doing something that we would deem so in our contemporaries than a
savant of the past would deserve condemnation for beliefs we would
regard as inappropriate and uninformed in a scientist of our day.

It is not only right but inevitable that one must judge *our* issues by *our* standards (they would not be our
standards if we did otherwise). How then could we in all fairness deny a
like privilege to others?

## The Role of Our Standards

An important distinction must be introduced at this point, however. Up
to this stage we have simply spoken of “standards” indiscriminately, as
though all standards were created equal. But this is certainly not the
case. There are standards and then there are standards. And in
particular, there are standards of *adequacy* and standards of *excellence*. Any and every apparatus of
evaluation permits of distinctions along these qualitative lines as
between norms for run-of-the-mill performance and norms for superior
performance.

Of others we are, by rights, entitled to expect in moral and ethical
matters no more than adequate performance. Here, we have to satisfy
ourselves with gray mediocrity. With others, doing more than this is a
matter of supererogation as far as we ourselves are concerned. Only of
ourselves are we entitled—indeed obligated—to demand superior
performance, of others we can reasonably expect no more than mere
adequacy.

But on what comparative basis can this ordinary/superior distinction be
predicated? Of course it will have to be that of the general cast of
characters that populate “their world.” That is to say we must judge
them—those remote agents—by the generally prevalent standards of their
time and place. Only where that time and place is our own and the people
at issue are ourselves are we entitled to view those general standards
in a critical spirit and to ask for more—for ethically superior
performance. The rest we must judge on the basis of their doing when in
Rome that which the Romans do. To ask more of them would be to ask for
too much—and the error here would be ours.

Because motivation plays so pivotal a role in moral appraisal, all that
we can properly expect of someone in matters of ethical assessment is
that they should act in accordance with the values and standards of
their time and place. And that is all that we can reasonably expect of
our own contemporaries and neighbors as well. *Only of ourselves can we justifi ably expect
more*. Here we can and should demand excellence rather than
adequacy. In relation to our own actions we should *not* see the standards of our place and
time as necessarily binding because we have the (moral) obligation to
assess the appropriateness and validity of these standards themselves,
and we should not see them as gift horses that we should not expect to
scrutinize. But with others the matter is different. While we have a
special sort of standing and responsibility towards ourselves, this is
not so with them.

It is, of course, every person’s right—nay, duty—to do what they can to
ensure that the general standards of their environment are excellent
rather than mediocre, and manifest an impetus to high quality rather
than (as seems to be the case in our own place and time) dropping
through the floor to mediocrity and “going to hell in a handbasket.” But
this aspect of one’s own moral duty is not the point of our present
concerns, which address the ethical and moral assessment of remote
agents. And here in the absence of specific, case-characterizing
information as to their intentions and motives, we must and should
conform our assessment to the standards of the place and time. Thus when
it comes to approving or disapproving the actions and character of
people, the pertinent apparatus of standards of judgment and evaluation
will have to be that of their setting, and it will only be in a very
special close to home case (that is, when dealing with ourselves) that
we are rationally and ethically entitled to ask for more.

## On Rendering Justice

In judging people by the standards of their time and place, we do of
course have to reckon with the fact that those standards may be
seriously deficient from our own evaluative point of view. But
nevertheless, the fact remains that if the standards allotted to them by
their historico-cultural setting were deficient (as we ourselves see
it), then this is something for which we cannot very well blame them—any
more than whatever reproach may ultimately be seen to be deserved by the
standards of our time and place can be imputed to any one of us. The
deficiency of their standards is not their fault but rather their loss.
It is no valid basis for reproaching someone in the context of moral
appraisal, but it is something for which the individual is more to be
pitied than censured.

The only fair and reasonable course to take in matters of moral
evaluation is to judge people in terms of what they did with the
opportunities at their disposal—how they played the hand that fate dealt
to them. In evaluating the acts or morals of someone of another place or
time, our obligation (by our own standards and values) is surely to
render justice and fairness to those with whom we deal. And only by
judging them against the background of their own values and standards
can we manage to accord them their fairness and justice that is the
right of all.

## A Key Objection

“But what if those standards and values of the place and time are
transparently evil and malign by our own standards—those which alone we
can accept as being appropriate? What of the value system of Hitler’s
Germany or Stalin’s USSR? Are such monstrous value systems to be
accepted as furnishing usable norms?”

The first question to be asked here is whether it is indeed the case
that these malign norms were indeed “the values of the time and
place”—that is, mid-twentieth-century Europe. In addressing that
question of time and place, we must not draw our borders too narrowly so
as to elevate local eccentricities into cultural norms.

The pivotal question when judging those “wrongdoers of the past” is not,
“Should they (ideally) have known better?” but rather, “Could they
(realistically) have known better?” And the consideration that leads us
rightly to condemn the sundry, egregious malefactors who constitute a
prime example here (Polish pogromists, Stalinist executioners, Nazi
gauleiters, and the like) is that they could and should have known
better—and usually doubtless did so, as their efforts to conceal their
actions proves. On this basis, the consideration that renders the
treatment of the Amerindians by the conquistadors particularly
contemptible is the prominent presence among them of numerous friars who
did their utmost to provide them of ample opportunity “to know better.”
But whenever we cannot construct a case for holding that these
“malefactors” of other times and places did in fact have such an
opportunity, it is neither reasonable nor just to reprehend them.

## Relativism Rejected

“Judge the actions of people by the standards of their place and time.”
But isn’t that just bad old relativism?

This, of course, will very much depend on just what it is that one takes
to be at issue with “relativism.” Now, standardly, this is construed as
a mode of indifferentism: you just pick your standards and to each his
own—it just doesn’t matter. And this, of course, is emphatically not
what is being maintained here. Such indifferentism is not even at issue
here because the value and standards of one’s place and time are not
matters of free choice to individuals; they are situational givens, not
deliberated options. What is contemplated here is accordingly not an
indifferentist relativism, but rather the contex-tualism of a
situationally determinate value system. This point deserves a somewhat
closer look.

The reality of it is that no system, of specific beliefs, of concrete
value, or of moral norms is an extramundane absolute, mandated in
unchangeable perfection by the abstract nature of things. The best we
can do is to figure things out by our own lights. And here we can do no
more than make use of the local, particularized, diversified instruments
that we humans can manage to develop within the sociocultural
limitations of our place and time. Thus far, contextualism is both
inevitable and correct. This situation emphatically does *not *engender an indifferentist and
subjectivist relativism. The crucial point is that one can be a
contextualistic pluralist in matters of morality without succumbing to
such indifferentist relativism (let alone nihilistic skepticism).

The characteristic flaw of relativism is its insistence on the *rational indifference* of alternatives.
Be it contentions, beliefs, doctrines, practices, customs, or whatever
is at issue, the relativist insist that “it just doesn’t matter” in
point of rationality. People are led to adopt one alternative over
another by *extra-rational*
considerations (custom, habituation, fashion, or whatever); from the
rational point of view there is nothing to choose—all the alternatives
stand on the same footing. Presented with alternatives of the sort at
issue—be it cognitive, moral, or whatever—the relativist insists that at
bottom it just doesn’t matter—at any rate as far as the rationality of
the issue is concerned. The fatal flaw of this position is rooted in the
fact that our claims, beliefs, doctrines, practices, customs, all belong
to identifiable departments of purposive human endeavor—identifiable
domains, disciplines, and the like. For all (or virtually all) human
enterprises are at bottom teleological—conducted with some sort of end
or objective in view.

Now in this context, the crucial fact is that some claims, beliefs,
doctrines, practices, customs, and so on are bound to serve the purposes
of their domain better than others. For it is pretty much inevitable
that in any goal-oriented enterprise, some alternative ways of
proceeding serve better than others with respect to the relevant range
of purpose, proving more efficient and effective in point of
goal-realization. And in the teleological contexts, they *thereby* establish themselves as
rationally appropriate with respect to the issues. It lies in the nature
of the thing that the quintessentially rational thing to do is to give
precedence and priority to those alternatives that are more effective
with respect to the range of purposes at issue.

Moral absolutism is to be rejected because a moral code is in its
details not a matter of one size fits all uniformity.<sup>2</sup> But
equally, moral indifferentism is to be rejected because the moral code
of one’s own community has a valid claim to our allegiance, barring any
specific and cogent reasons to the contrary. We thus reject relativism
in favor of an objectivism that sees objectivity not as a matter of a
“God’s eye view” but rather one that we ourselves can see as reasonable
insofar as we are being reasonable about the pursuit of our own
projects.

## Hoisted by One’s Own Petard?

A subtle and sophisticated objection looms up at this point:

You say it is inappropriate and ethically obtuse to judge the people of
another day and place by the standards of our own. And you say that
instead they should be judged by the standards of their own time and
place. But then look to our own contem-poraries—the people of *our* time and place. As you yourself
say, they seem to be given to judging everyone by their standards— past
people included. If it indeed is nowadays a normal practice to judge the
past by current standards, then how can you possibly condemn this
practice? After all, you insist that we can expect no more of people
than of conformity to the norms of their place and time. In line with
your own principles, you should therefore see this as only to be
expected and refrain from disapproval on this basis.

However, this subtle and sophisticated objection is no better than
sophistical. It fails to take heed of the distinction, carefully drawn
above, between evaluating a generic mode of acting on the one hand, and
on the other hand, evaluating a particular agent’s actions. We can
condemn a mode of acting and yet see it in certain circumstances as
understandable and venial. It is not being maintained that those critics
and commentators who engage in criticizing past actions and agents by
current standards deserve condemnation. We can and should be liberal
towards them and understanding towards their actions. But what we need
not and should not do is to approve of the agents’ actions at issue.
Here, as elsewhere, we can—and should—be understanding of the wrongdoer
without endorsing the wrongdoing.

How, after all, would we ourselves want to be judged by our
pos-terity—what would we regard proper and appropriate here? Think of an
example. Consider abortion—especially after the first trimester. It is
perfectly conceivable (I don’t say likely) that the sensibilities of a
later age will look on this as a form of murder—pretty much as we
ourselves view the “exposure” of unwanted baby girls in rural China.
Surely we would resent the idea that the mothers of these potential
children should be adjudged to be murderesses. Nor would we approve of
condemnation if there came a time when people came to view automobile
driving as a barbaric and callously life-indifferent practice, because
we know full well in advance that hundreds of lives will be sacrificed
on its altar over every holiday weekend.

## The Demands of Rationality and Justice

The salient point of these deliberations is that moral evaluation is
itself a mode of activity that is inevitably subject to moral standards.
Passing moral and ethical judgment on people and their acts is itself an
ethically laden step that has direct implications for our own moral
standing. For doing this is something that we can do more or less
justly, more or less fairly, more or less conscientiously. Thus in
engaging in this generic practice, we ourselves are doing something that
has an ethical dimension. As the Bible tells us, in judging others we
lay ourselves open to judgment.

While those doings of the people of others times and places is a matter
of what *they* did, our forming
evaluative judgments about this is a matter of what *we ourselves* are doing. And as such,
this process of evaluative appraisal regarding people’s doings has a
pervasively ethical coloration. And accordingly, it can—and should—be
asked of us that we have proceeded in an ethically appropriate way,
proceeding with a view to such salient, here and now pertinent factors
of evaluative property as *fairness*, *justice*, *reasonableness*, urbanity, and
generosity. The evaluative practice we are concerned with falls within
the scope of its own concerns. It is something in which the interests of
others are engaged in a way that demands procedural appropriateness on
our part.

Accordingly, we here have both the right and the obligation to require
and achieve an at least adequate level of ethical performance in
assessing people’s judgmental practices. And the demands of adequacy in
this context take heed of those salient values that have just been
enumerated. At this second level removed, it is indeed those standards
that are—or should be—ours that are determinative. But in this regard,
evaluating the acts and merits of people of other times and places by
the current standards of the present (let alone by our own personal
standards) is unfair, unreasonable, unjust, ungenerous, and unrealistic.

In the final analysis, this business of evaluating others is something
that we ourselves conduct on our own account, and thereby is bound to be
something that is—or should be—subject to *our* norms. And so, what is now at
issue calls for applying our standards to what we ourselves are doing
here and now. And here the operative norms of justice and fairness that
hold for us call for reliance on *their* norms in forming our judgments
regarding them. It is our own values that do—and should—cry out loud for
evaluating those of other places and times by *their* standards rather than *ours*.

Thus in this matter of second-level considerations—of the standards
governing *our own* evaluative
practice—it is indeed *our*
standards that should be operative. And the demand that these standards
make upon our evaluative modus operandi is that it shall proceed with
reference to the standards of the subjects of evaluation (rather than
those of the evaluating agent). In this regard, the prime directive
alike of reasonableness and justice is represented by the commandment,
“By the standards of their day shall ye judge them.”
