# 11. Pluralism and Concretization Quandaries

## The Question of Political Consensus

Is seeking consensus to be regarded as a prime imperative of rational
social policy? To be sure, the widely favored allocation of a pride of
place to consensus sounds benevolent, irenic, and socially delectable.
Indeed, it may sound so plausible at first that it is difficult to see
how a person of reasonableness and goodwill could fail to go along.
Nevertheless, there is room for real doubt as to whether this
utopian-sounding position makes sense. Serious questions can be raised
as to whether the best interests of a healthy community are served by a
commitment to consensus.

In and of itself, consensus is clearly no absolute. One obviously has to
worry about what it is that people are in consensus about and why it is
they are so. (Think of the precedent of Nazi Germany.) All the same, the
idea has been astir in some European intellectual circles for many years
now that a just and democratic society can be achieved only on the basis
of a shared social commitment to the pursuit of communal consensus. Such
a view insists that the public harmony required for the smooth
functioning of a benign social order must be rooted in an agreement on
fundamentals. Progress toward a congenial and enlightened society
accordingly requires an unfolding course of evolving consensus about the
public agenda—a substantial agreement regarding the practical question
of what is to be done.

This general line of thought traces back to Hegel, who envisioned an
inexorable tendency towards a condition of things where all thinking
people will share a common acceptance of the manifold of truths revealed
by reason. Sailing in Hegel’s wake, the tradition of German social
thought, reaching through Marx to the Frankfurt School and beyond, has
reinforced the idea that the realization of a communally benign social
order requires a commitment to consensus—a shared public commitment to
the idea that the pursuit of consensus in communal affairs is a great
and good thing.

This position, however, is deeply problematic. A good case can be made
out for the contrary view that a benign social order need not be
committed to the quest for consensus but can be constituted along very
different, irreducibly *pluralistic* lines. After all, the idea
that a consensus on fundamentals is realistically available is in fact
false with respect to most large, complex, advanced societies and is
simply not needed for the benign and “democratic” management of communal
affairs. And even the idea that consensus is a desirable ideal is very
questionable.

To begin at the end, let it be foreshadowed that the policy whose
appropriateness will be defended here is one of a *restrained dissonance *based on an
acceptance of a diversity and dissensus (disagreement, discord) of
opinion—a benevolent (or at any rate resigned) acceptance of the
disagreement of others with a credo of respect to beliefs and values.
Such an approach envisions a posture of diversity conjoined with “live
and let live,” taking the line that a healthy democratic social order
can not only tolerate but even—within limits—welcome dissensus, provided
that the conflicts involved are kept within “reasonable bounds.” The
present discussion will accordingly maintain the merits of the
consensus-dispensing view that a benign social order can be unabashedly
pluralistic and based not on the pursuit of agreement but on
arrangements that provide for *acquiescence in*

*disagreement.* This position sees
as perfectly acceptable a situation that is not one of judgmental
homogeneity and uniformity, but one of a dissonance and diversity that
is restrained to a point well short of outright conflict and chaos.

Dissensus has this to be said for it, at least: it is at odds with a
stifling orthodoxy. A dissent-accommodating society is ipso facto
pluralistic, with all the advantages that accrue in situations where no
one school of thought is able to push the others aside. Indeed, the
extent to which a society exhibits tolerance—is willing and able to
manage a consensual diversity arising from free thought and
expres-sion—could be seen as a plausible standard of merit, since a
spirit of mutual acceptance and accommodation is one of the hallmarks of
a benign and productive social order.

It must be acknowledged, of course, that dissensus does have a negative
side. Its negativities preeminently include:

-   1\. The danger of escalation from productive competition to
    destructive conflict.

-   2\. The possible diversion of resources (effort and energy) into
    potentially unproductive forms of rivalry.

-   3\. The separatist fragmentation of the community into groups
    estranged from each other in a posture of mutual hostility.

-   4\. The tendency to dismiss otherwise meritorious plans, projects,
    and ideas simply because they originate from the “outside,” from a
    rival, competing source.

Clearly, the story is not altogether one-sided. However, situations
where the public good is best served by a general acquiescence in
disagreement are not only perfectly possible but also often actual. Life
being what it is, it would be too hard on all of us to be in a position
where we had to reach agreement in matters of opinion and evaluation. A
society in which the various schools of thought and opinion try to win
the others over by rational suasion is certainly superior to one in
which they seek to do so by force or intimidation. But this does not
automatically make it superior to one where these groups let one another
alone to flourish or flounder in their divergent individuality.

## Acquiescence and Controlled Conflict

Consensus by its very nature is a condition of intellectual uniformity,
the homogeneity of thought and opinion. And just herein lie some of its
significant shortcomings. For the fact is that the impulsion to
consensus will in various circumstances prove itself to be:

-   1\. An impediment to creativity and innovation. (Settling into
    consensus is a discouragement from endeavoring to outdo others and
    striving to improve on their efforts by “doing one’s utmost to
    excel.”)

-   2\. An invitation to mediocrity. (By its very nature, the
    realization of consensus involves a compromise among potentially
    divergent tendencies. Thus, it tends to occupy “the middle ground”
    where people are most easily brought together, but where, for that
    very reason, the element of creative, insightful innovation is
    likely to be missing.)

-   3\. A disincentive to productive effort. (One of the most powerful
    motives for improving the level of one’s performance is, after all,
    to come under the pressure of competition and the threat of being
    outdone by a rival.)

Not only is insistence on the pursuit of general consensus in practical
matters and public affairs unrealistic, it is also counterproductive.
For it deprives us of the productive stimulus of competition and the
incentive of rivalry. In many situations of human life, people are
induced to make their best effort in inquiry or creative activity
through rivalry rather than emulation, through differentiation rather
than conformity, through an attempt to impede the folly they see all
around. Productivity, creativity, and the striving for excellence are—
often as not—the offspring of diversity and conflict.

Most human intellectual, cultural, and social progress has begun with an
assault by dissident spirits against a comfortably established
consensus. The Andalusian friar, Bartolomeo de las Casas, upheld the
human rights of Amerindians against the consensus of Spanish
conquistadores and settlers alike that they were inferior beings; the
eighteenth-century American abolitionists protested the institution of
slavery in the teeth of a vast preponderance of powerful opponents; J.
S. Mill’s protest against “the subjection of women” was a lone voice
crying out in a wilderness of vociferous males. And lest it be said that
such “eccentric” but benevolent views did all eventually win through a
general consensus of thought and universality of practice, one can point
to the teaching of Jesus whose widespread endorsement is largely a
matter of words and not deeds. We can have no comfortable assurance
about the present—or future—consensual victory of truth, justice, and
the cause of rightness.

When we find ourselves dissenting from others, we may dislike their
opinions and disapprove of their actions—and they of ours— but we can,
by and large, manage to come to terms. We can—of-ten, at least—“get
along” with others quite adequately when we can “agree to disagree” or
when we can simply ignore, dismiss, and sideline our disagreements,
postponing further opposition for another day. What matters for social
harmony is not that we agree with one another, but that each of us
acquiesces in what the other is doing, that we “live and let live,” so
we avoid letting our differences become a casus belli between *us.* Acquiescence is the key. And this
is not a matter of *approbation,*
but rather one of a mutual restraint that, even when disapproving and
disagreeing, is willing (no doubt reluctantly) to “let things be,”
because the alternative—actual conflict or warfare—will lead to a
situation that is still worse. All is well as long as we can manage to
keep our differences beneath the threshold of outright conflict.

The crucial fact about *acquiescence* is that it is generally
rooted not in *agreement* with
others but rather in a preparedness to get on without it. What makes
good practical and theoretical sense is the step of (on occasion)
accepting something without agreeing with it—of “going along” despite
disagreement—an acquiescence of diversity grounded in a resigned
toleration of the discordant views of others. The merit of such
tolerance is not (as John Stuart Mill had it) that it is an interim
requisite for progress toward an ultimate, collective realization of the
truth, but simply and less ambitiously, that it is a requisite for the
peace and quiet that we all require for the effective pursuit of our own
varied visions and projects.

Historical experience, empirical understanding of the human realities,
and theoretical analysis of our social situation all conjoin to indicate
that an insistence on agreement among rational inquirers and
problem-solving agents is simply futile. However inconvenient for
philosophers, ample experience shows that not only in matters of
politics, art, and religion but also in a whole host of cognitive
domains like history, economics, social science, and philosophy, we
shall never actually achieve a firmly-secured general consensus. And
there is no reason to think that a benign society can exist only where
the clash of private opinions and preferences is extinguished by the
processes of social coordination. A healthy social order can perfectly
well be based not on agreement but on the sort of mutual restraint in
which subgroups simply go their own way—live and let live—in the face of
dissensus.

Neither in intellectual nor in social contexts, after all, have we any
firm assurance that a consensual position somehow represents the
objectively correct or operationally optimal solution. To be sure, in
many cases some sort of resolution must be arrived at with respect to
public issues. But we need not *agree* about it: a perfectly viable
result may be had simply on the basis of a reluctant acceptance of
diversity. What matters for the smooth functioning of a social order is
not that the individuals or groups that represent conflicting positions
should think alike, but simply that they acquiesce in certain shared
ways of conducting the society’s affairs.

## Concretization Quandaries

Consensus polity has practical as well as theoretical weaknesses. A
concretization quandary arises when it is a good idea to do *A*, but the only way to do so
concretely is by doing *A*<sub>1</sub> or *A*<sub>2</sub> or *A*<sub>3</sub>, and so on, while
nevertheless doing each of these *A*<sub>i</sub> is a bad idea. In such
situations there is no concrete way of realizing a generically desirable
objective.

There are innumerable cases in which the democratic process so operates
that a social program or public work is generally acknowledged as
something that is abstractly (or generically) desirable, but where
nevertheless each and every one of the concrete ways of realizing it is
deemed unacceptable. In such a situation, our mini-society finds itself
in a *concretization quandary*:
there is no majority accepted way of reaching a majority accepted goal.
This general phenomenon is, after all, often encountered in the
political arena, where we frequently read in the press stories of the
following tendency:

When asked what congress should do about the Federal deficit, two-thirds
of the voters preferred cuts in major spending programs, but this
support for spending cuts dissipated whenever it came to specific
programs.

We have here a perplexity that is only too common in democratic
political contexts. Think of the common situation of a congressional
stalemate or gridlock where there is a virtually overwhelming public
pressure—duly recognized in congress—that something be done to resolve a
certain problem, while nevertheless each of the available solutions is
deemed unacceptable. We confront *gridlock* whenever various interest
groups manage to vitiate a general agreement that something be done with
some combination of the groups managing to defeat each one of the
concretizations of that generally agreed desideratum. In such
situations, every *available*
solution generates an opposition sufficiently powerful to defeat it. The
upshot here defeats the plausible principle that “to will the end is to
will the means,” because each and every one of the means to that
accepted end is itself deemed unacceptable.

Such concretization quandaries reflect the *logical* impracticability of adopting
the pervasive and seemingly natural principle of the (seemingly)
democratic process: *majorities
represent the will of the group; if the majority wants it done, then so
be it—let it be done*. For in various cases, the majority indeed
wants something to be done. Yet, this end can only be achieved by
adopting one or another concrete implementing measure, and a majority is
against doing each and every one of these individual
concretizations—with the result of “gridlocking” that universally
favored measure. Only by somehow forming a particular result in which
every part at least acquiesces can that generally favored objective be
realized in such circumstances.

## Some Objections

Consider the following line of objection put forward by a hypothetical
critic:

I agree with much of what you have said on the merits of dis-sensus and
diversity. But you have failed to reckon with the crucial distinction
between a consensus on matters of groundlevel *substance* and a consensus on matters
of *procedure.* As you maintain, a
benign social order can indeed dispense with a substantive consensus
regarding *what* is decided upon.
But what it indispensably requires is a procedural agreement on modes of
conflict resolution—a second-order consensus about *how* those first-order issues are to be
decided. If the society is to serve effectively the interests of those
involved, and if mutual strife and conflict are to be averted, there
must be a consensus on *process*
or the validity of the procedural ways in which these base-level
resolutions are arrived at. Consensus on particular decisions may be
dispensable, but consensus on the decision-making *process* is essential.

Despite its surface plausibility, even this more sophisticated argument
for the necessity of an at least procedural consensuality is deeply
problematic.

For one thing, even where there is a consensus about process, there may
nevertheless be sharp disagreement regarding matters of implementation.
Even where people agree on, say maintenance of law and order, civility
of interaction, an equitable distribution of resources—and many other
such “procedural” principles of human action in the public domain—such
procedural agreements are much too abstract to define particular public
policies. (We can agree on the need for “law and order” and yet quite
plausibly disagree sharply on questions of civil disobedience and the
limits of appropriate protest.) Process consensus is a lot to ask
for—but still is not sufficient for a benign social order.

But the problem goes even deeper. For it is simply false that procedural
agreement is indispensable for a benign social order. To manage its
affairs in a mutually acceptable way, a community needs no agreement on
the merits of those procedures as long as there is acquiescence in their
operation. What matters is *not*
that we agree on methods—I may have my favorite and you yours. I might,
for example, think that the proper way to address the issue at hand is
for the electorate to decide it by referendum; you think that the right
and proper way is by a vote in the legislature. But as long as we both
acquiesce in the established process of having the courts decide, then
all is well. There is no *agreement* here: we emphatically do not
concur in thinking that the courts are the proper (let alone the best!)
avenue for a solution—in fact, *neither* of us thinks so. What we do is
simply acquiesce in what the courts make their decisions on the issue.
What matters for irenic conflict resolution is not second-order
consensus but second-order acquiescence. A sensible defense of
acquiescence is accordingly not predicated on ignoring the distinction
between first-order, substantive issues and second-order, methodological
ones. Rather it is prepared to turn this distinction to its own purposes
and to see it as advantageous rather than inimical to establish the
claims of acquiescence vis-a-vis consensus.

But even when we “agree to disagree” do we not in fact agree? Not
really. Or, rather, we do so in name only! An agreement to disagree is
as much an agreement as a paper dragon is a dragon—the whole point is
that there is no agreement at all here. Parties who agree to disagree do
not *agree* on anything—they
simply exhibit a similarity of behavior in that they walk away from a
disagreement. They no more agree than do bouncing billiard balls that
move away from one another.

Another possible objection to an emphasis on acquiescence as a mechanism
of social decision runs as follows:

To cast acquiescence in a leading role in the management of public
affairs is to invite the deployment of raw power; to open the doors to
coercion, oppression, domination, and the subjection of the weak to
control by the strong.

But this view of the matter is simply unjust. The rational person’s
acquiescence is, after all, based on a cost-benefit calculation that
weighs the costs of opposition against the costs of “going along.” And
to deploy raw power is to raise the stakes—to readjust not only the
benefits but also the costs of acquiescence. And as those who study
revolutions soon learn, it is precisely at the point when power is made
blatantly overt—when bayonets are mounted and blood is shed in the
streets—that acquiescence is most gravely endangered.

It is clear that discernibly just, benign, and generally advantageous
arrangements will secure the acquiescence of people far more readily and
more extensively than those that infringe upon such obvious social
desiderata. It is quite false that an approach that roots social
legitimacy in acquiescence somehow favors oppression and injustice.

To be sure, much will depend on the sorts of people one is dealing with.
If they are unreasonably longsuffering and spineless—if they are
weak-kneed and cave in easily under pressure—then a social order based
on acquiescence is one in which they indeed can be oppressed and
exploited. (But then, of course, if they are totally accommodating and
yielding, a consensual order based on agreement with others is also one
in which their true interests are likely to suffer.) The fact remains
that sensible people are distinctly unlikely to acquiesce in
arrangements that are oppressive to them. An acquiescence-oriented
political process does not provide a rationale for domination,
exploitation, and oppression precisely because these are factors in
which sensible people are unlikely to acquiesce—once brought into play
they soon call forth opposition rather than accommodation. One of the
early lessons that an acquiescence-based society learns is that its
ethics are not smoothly viable if people are constantly testing the
limits of acquiescence. An emphasis on being civilized, urbane, and
restrained is not at odds with acquiescence but is actually conducive to
the enterprise.

Moreover, the complaint that a polity of acquiescence inherently favors
the perpetration of injustices cannot be sustained. Acquiescence is like
agreement in that nobody else can do it for you. People may be able to
rearrange the conditions under which you will have to proceed in this
regard, but how you proceed within those conditions is always in the
final analysis up to you. As recent developments in Eastern Europe all
too clearly show, people will only acquiesce in injustice up to a
certain point. After that they turn to non-cooperation and
opposition—they take up arms against the sea of troubles or perhaps
simply emigrate. The limits of acquiescence are finite.

Admittedly, acquiescence can be bad—it can be forced or compelled. It is
no automatic route to political legitimacy. But then of course neither
is consensus. We are always entitled to ask why people agree: is it for
a good and valid reason—a concern for truth or for fairness, say—or is
it because of self-interest, conformism, constraint, or propagandism.
Legitimacy is always an additional issue. And just as it is not just
consensus one wants but a consensus that is rational and free, so it is
not just acquiescence one wants but acquiescence that is given in a way
that is sensible and uncoerced.

## The Wider Political Perspective

A great continental divide runs across the landscape of philosophy. On
the one side lies the Platonic tradition that looks to systemic order
through a rational coordination under the aegis of universal principles.
On the other side lies the Aristotelian tradition that looks to organic
balance and an equilibration of diversity and division. The one is
geared to a classicism of holistic order, the other to a pluralism of
countervailing checks and balances. The one favors the rational
uniformity of a harmonious consensus, the other the creative diversity
of a limited dissensus. The one invokes the tidiness of theorizing
reason, the other the diversified complexity of actual history.

Given this divide, European political thought since the time of the
Enlightenment has been fixated upon the idea of the “general consent” of
the people in defining a general agreement of the community (*la volonte generale*), which may or may
not be all that apparent to the people themselves (and may need to be
discerned on their behalf by some particularly insightful elite). All
the same, that the dangers of this idea run amuck is apparent to anyone
who has looked even casually into the history of the French Revolution.

The polity of consensus proceeds from a fundamentally socialistic
commitment to the coordination and alignment of individual action into
the uniform social order of “rationalized” central planning (albeit, no
doubt, a uniformization that is not imposed, but rather
en-gendered—presumably—through the “hidden hand” of an idealized
rationality). Legislatures, taxing authorities, and political theorists
all like to keep the affairs of the citizenry neat and tidy. But the
fact of the matter is that the impetus to public consensus, agreement,
and concurrence of thought will not be high on the priority list of the
true friends of personal freedom and liberty. And so, the polity of
pluralism abandons the goal of a monolithically unified “rational order”
for the “creative diversity” of a situation of variegated rivalry and
competition. Its political paradigm is not that of a command economy,
with its ideal of rationalization and uniformizing coordination, but
that of a free market with its competitive rivalry of conflicting
interests. Consensuality looks to uniformity of thought, pluralism to
reciprocally fruitful harmonization of discordant elements.

Rather different sorts of policy approaches are at work in social orders
based on consensus-oriented and acquiescence-oriented principles.
Consensus-seeking societies will aim to maximize the number of people
who approve of what is being done; acquiescence-seeking societies seek
to minimize the number of people who disapprove *very* strongly of what is being done.
The one seeks actual agreement, the other seeks to avoid disagreement so
keen as to preclude acquiescence. The two processes sound similar but
are in actual fact quite different in spirit and in mode of operation.

The social requisite of a viable public order can thus plausibly be
viewed to lie not in the formation of consensus but in the forging of
conditions in which people who disagree—even on fundamen-tals—can
nevertheless manage to acquiesce in dissensus through recognizing this
as a state of affairs that is not only tolerable but even in some way
beneficial. Insofar as consensus is something positive then, it has to
be seen in the light of a desideratum rather than a valid aspiration of
the sort at issue with an ideal. The polity of consensus is too utopian
to provide us with so useful an instrument. Consensus simply is not a
requisite for the prime social desideratum of having people lead lives
that are at once personally satisfying and socially
constructive.<sup>1</sup> The crux of the matter is finding and
prompting arrangements that make it possible for people who disagree to
nevertheless contribute to a common good.
