# 14. On the Improvability of the World

## The Improvability Thesis

Since Voltaire, most people have thought it absurd of Leibniz to deem
this vale of tears to be the best of possible worlds. And what
principally gives people pause here is that they see this world as
imperfect on grounds of potential remediation. Laplace, for one,
maintained that, given the chance, he could readily improve on the
natural world’s arrangements. And other bold spirits often think the
same. It is perfectly clear, so they say, that this, that, or the other
modification would make this a better world. And from there it is only
one short and easy step to the conclusion that a benevolent creator does
not exist.<sup>1</sup>

All the same, this idea that the world is improvable by tinkering is
deeply problematic. The task of the discussion is to show how this is
so.

## Non-Improvability vs. Theory and Optimalism

The idea that the actual world as we have it is the best possible goes
back to Plato’s *Timaeus*:

The divine being (*theos*) wished
that everything should be good and nothing imperfect as far as possible
(*kata dunamin*) . . . since he
judged that order (*taxis*) was
better than disorder. For him who is the supremely good, it neither was
nor is permissible to do anything other than what is the best \[among
the possibilities\].<sup>2</sup>

What Plato envisions is a world that, imperfections notwithstanding,
will nevertheless be optimal—that is, “for the best”—in being just as
perfect as the realities of the situation permit.

From Leibniz onward, the optimalist has faced the charge of being a Dr.
Pangloss who will acknowledge no evil in the world—much like that
familiar trio of wise monkeys who “see no evil, hear no evil, speak no
evil.” So what is it that could possibly favorably incline someone to
Leibniz’s contention that this is the best of possible worlds?

Well, there is, to begin with, the consideration, to which none of us
can be wholly indifferent, that this is the world in which we ourselves
exist. One can hardly avoid seeing this circumstance in a favorable
light. Dr. Seuss captures the point admirably:

\[W\]orse than all that . . . Why, you might be a WASN’T!

A Wasn’t has no fun at all. No it doesn’t.

A Wasn’t just isn’t. He just isn’t present.

But you . . . You ARE YOU! And now isn’t that pleasant!<sup>3</sup>

Then, there is also the more impersonal consideration that this is a
world whose developmental processes have brought intelligent beings into
existence. This too one cannot but see as a good thing.

To be sure, such considerations merely argue for *good* and not yet for *best*. This is something that has to be
based on more complex considerations.

What most fundamentally stands in the way of conjectural improvability
is the pervasive interconnectedness of things. This means there is no
real prospect of local tinkering with the world without wider
ramifications. In this world—and indeed in any possible world—states of
affairs are so interconnected that local changes always have pervasive
consequences.

The domain of fact has a systemic integrity that one disturbs at one’s
own peril: a change at any point has reverberations everywhere. Once you
embark on a reality-modifying assumption, then as far as pure logic is
concerned all bets are off. Any local “fix” always has involvements
throughout, and consequently, no tweaking or tinkering may be able to
effect an improvement. For the introduction of belief-contravening
hypotheses puts everything at risk. In their wake, nothing is safe
anymore. To maintain consistency, you must revamp the entire fabric of
fact, which is to say that you confront a task of Sisyphean proportions.
(This is something that those who make glib use of the idea of other
possible worlds all too easily forget.) Reality is something too complex
to be remade anymore than fragmentally by our thought, which can
effectively come to terms only with piecemeal changes *in* reality but not with comprehensive
changes *of* reality. Reality’s
reach has a grip that it will never entirely relax: it is a tightly
woven web where the cutting of any thread leads to an unraveling of the
whole.

The fact is that limitedness is inevitable with finite beings. Humans
cannot be superhuman. But imperfections of various sorts accompany any
class of items, so that a world cannot be devoid of imperfections. If
you want animals, you must provide them with organic food. And a food
chain brings with it a nature rough in tooth and claw. All worldly
arrangements have a downside that involves imperfection.

But all the same, imperfection does not preclude optimality. All that is
required here is that—notwithstanding whatever imperfections there are
and whatever positivities there might be—no other possible world
arrangement ranks higher overall. An imperfect world is not thereby
automatically improvable. For the reality of it is that improvement
faces major obstacles.

## The Butterfly Effect as a Substantive Obstacle to Optimalism

“But how can you claim that the world is all that meritorious and
benignly designed? Surely, envisioning a better world would not be all
that hard. After all, it wouldn’t have taken much to arrange some small
accident that would have removed a Hitler or a Stalin from the scene. To
figure out how this sort of thing could be arranged—to the world’s vast
improvement—is not rocket science!”

Alas, dear objector, even rocket science is not good enough. For what
stands in the way here is the massive obstacle of what is known as the
butterfly effect. This phenomenon takes root in the *sensitive dependence of outcomes on initial
conditions* in chaos theory, where a tiny variation in the initial
conditions of a dynamic system can issue immense variations in the long
term behavior of the system. E. N. Lorenz first analyzed the effect in a
pioneering 1963 paper, which caused a meteorologist to remark that “if
the theory were correct, one flap of a sea gull’s wings would be enough
to alter the course of the weather forever.”<sup>4</sup> With this
process, changing even one tiny aspect of nature—one single flutter of a
butterfly’s wings—could have the most massive repercussions: tsunamis,
droughts, ice ages, there is no limit. With this phenomenology in play,
rewriting the course of the cosmos in the wake of even the smallest
hypothetic change is an utter impracticability.

A *chaotic condition*, as natural
scientists nowadays use this term, obtains when we have a situation that
is tenable or viable in certain circumstances but where a change in
these circumstances—even one that is extremely minute—will destabilize
the overall situation with imponderable consequences, producing results
that cannot be foreseen in informative detail. Any hypothetical change
in the physical makeup of such a world—however small—sets in motion a
vast cascade of further such changes, either in regard to the world’s
furnishings or in the laws of nature.

For all we can tell, reality is just like that. And now suppose that we
make only a very small alteration in the descriptive composition of the
real, say by adding one pebble to the river bank. But which pebble?
Where are we to get it, and what are we to put in its place? And where
are we to put the air or the water that this new pebble displaces?
Moreover, the region within six inches of the new pebble used to hold
*N* pebbles. It now holds *N* + 1. Of which region are we to say
that it holds *N -* 1. If it is
that region yonder, then how did the pebble get here from there? By a
miraculous instantaneous transport? By a little boy picking it up and
throwing it, but then, which little boy? And how did he get there? And
if he threw it, then what happened to the air that his throw displaced
that would otherwise have gone undisturbed? Here problems arise without
end.

As we conjure with those pebbles, what about the structure of the
envisioning electromagnetic, thermal, and gravitational fields? Just how
are these to be preserved, as was given in the removal and/or shift of
the pebbles above? How is matter to be readjusted to preserve
consistency here? Or are we to do so by changing the fundamental laws of
physics?

What the butterfly effect means is that we can no longer be glibly
facile about our ability to tinker with reality to effect improvements
in the world by somehow removing this or that among its patent
imperfections through well-intentioned readjustments. For what would
need to be shown is that such a repair would not yield unintended, and
indeed altogether unforeseen, consequences resulting in an overall
inferior result. And this would be no easy task—and indeed could prove
to be one far beyond our feeble powers.

“But could this situation not have been avoided altogether? After all,
that butterfly effect is the result of the fact that, in certain
respects, the laws of nature have yielded a system of the sort that
mathematicians characterize as chaotic. Surely one could change the laws
of nature to avoid this result.” It is no doubt so. But now we have
leapt from the frying pan into the fire. For in taking this line we
propose to fiddle not merely with this or that specific occurrence in
world history, but are engaged in conjuring with the very laws of nature
themselves. And this embarks us on the uncharted waters of a monumental
second-order butterfly effect—one whose implications and ramifications
are incalculable. The point is simple: Yes, the world’s particular
existing negativities are indeed remediable in theory. But to avert them
in practice would require accepting an even larger array of negativities
overall. The cost of avoiding those manifest evils of this world would
then be the realization of an even larger mass of misfortune.

But is it actually the case—really and truly—that the imperfect
arrangements of this world nevertheless leave it in the position of
overall optimality? It would certainly take an intelligence far more
powerful than mine—and perhaps even than *ours*—to establish so difficult and
contentious a claim, something that would require surveying in
distributive detail an effectively unsurveyable manifold of items. It
would clearly be an act of hubris to assert categorically one’s ability
to demonstrate that the world as we have it cannot possibly be improved
upon when everything is taken into account. But the very fact that the
doorway of possibility is open here shows that the violation of common
sense objection cannot be sustained. For here, as so often elsewhere,
common sense must in the final analysis be prepared to yield to deeper
considerations.

## The Package Deal Predicament

The world we have—and indeed any possible alternative to it—is a package
deal. Once we start tinkering with it, it seeps through our fingers like
water. In seeking to change it, we create conditions where there is no
longer any anaphoric “it” to deal with. To tinker with a world is to
abolish it—to replace it by something else.

And this something else could readily prove to be worse overall. To
render this idea graphic, one should consider W. W. Jacobs’ chilling
story of *The Monkey’s Paw*, whose
protagonist is miraculously granted wishes that actually come true—but
always at a fearful price. Granted, the world’s *particular,* existing negativities are
indeed remediable in theory, but to arrange for this will likely entail
an even larger array of negativities overall (The Monkey’s Paw effect).
The cost of avoiding those manifest evils of this world would then be
the realization of an even larger mass of misfortune. The thesis here is
effectively that of Leibniz: it is not intended to claim that the world
is *perfect*, but just that it is
*optimal*—the best possible with
the emphasis not on *best* but on
*possible*.

The upshot of these considerations is thus clear. The idea that the
world’s defects can be fixed by tinkering is decidedly implausible. And
given the fact that rendering the world as a whole lies beyond our
feeble powers, we have to face up to the consideration that—for all we
can tell—this is indeed the best of possible worlds, and that changing
the existing condition of the universe in any way whatsoever will
diminish the sum total of its positivities. We have to face the prospect
that there is no “quick fix” for the negativities of this world.

The reality of it is that merit maximization at the global level viewed
collectively, neither entails nor requires merit maximization at the
local level viewed distributively. The world’s constituent components
are certainly not as perfect as can be. It is perfectly possible that
they are interconnected (via the butterfly effect) in such a way that
improving one substantial element or aspect can be achieved only at a
dispositionally higher cost in terms of merit diminution elsewhere. As
concerns merit, the existing situation could well be the best overall
arrangement of things—its manifest defects to the contrary
notwithstanding.

For the sake of a (certainly crude) illustration of the sort of
situation at issue, consider the hypothetical microworld subject to the
following requirement:

Let *A* represent a factor of
positive merit. Let *X* be an
environmental condition relevant to *A*’s existence, subject to the idea
that an *A can* only be sustained
in being when three *X*’s are
laterally adjacent. And finally, let it be that the “space” of our world
consists of a 4 x 4 rectangular grid.

In these circumstances, the optimal arrangement of affairs can only take
the form:

<div style="border:solid;">

|                                           |                                           |                                           |                                           |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
|                                           | *X*> | *A* | *X* |
| *X* | *A* | *X* | *A* |
| *A* | *X* | *A* | *X* |
| *X* | *A* | *X* |                                           |

</div>

Or any of its variants by 90° rotation. Now, to be sure, matters can
indeed be improved upon locally—any one of these *X*-occupied positions could in theory
accommodate an *A*. But globally,
matters could not be improved upon. Any attempt to replace an *X* by an *A* would impel matters into an inferior
result overall.

World optimization is always maximization under various existential
constraints imposed by the types of things whose realization is being
contemplated. And such constraints mean that while the world may well be
as good as it can be *as a
whole*—that is, is aggre-gatively merit maximizing—nevertheless,
it is not correspondingly merit maximizing in its parts taken
distributively. The condition of many of these parts is far from optimal
and can certainly be improved. It is just that the merit of the parts is
so interconnected and intertwined that improvement in one area is bound
to carry with it diminution in another.

We shall characterize as a teeter-totter condition any arrangement where
an improvement in regard to one aspect can only be achieved at the cost
of worsening matters in another respect. Whenever this situation is in
play, it stands decisively in the way of absolute perfection, and this
line of thought vividly indicates how “fixing” local imperfections can
readily fail to tell against global optimality.

## The Problem of Evil or the Dr. Pangloss Objection of World Improvability

Yet what is one to make of such an optimalism?

Note, to begin with, that the idea that this is the best of *possible *worlds is not an occasion for
unmixed delight and unalloyed rejoicing. For to characterize the world
as the best possible is not necessarily optimism but is perfectly
compatible with the decidedly pessimistic lament that, notwithstanding
the many manifest imperfections of this world, the sad fact remains that
all of the alternatives available in the manifold of possibility are yet
worse.

So, the world cannot be *perfect*.
But why should it not be *better*?
As acknowledged earlier, the optimalist has inherited a Leibnizian
problem, facing the charge of being a Dr. Pangloss who will acknowledge
no evil in the world.

The traditional line of response to this sort of objection has two parts
that respectively pivot on the distinction between moral and physical
evil—between misfortunes that originate through the deliberate agency of
intelligent beings, and those that, like earthquakes, storms, and other
natural disasters, originate through the impersonal operations of
nature.

The traditional explanation of *natural* evils looks to several
distinct ways of addressing the problem of the world’s misfortunes and
suffering:

-   • To dismiss natural evil as mere illusion, as only apparent but not
    real. This is the illusionism of Oriental mysticism and of the
    Panglossian unrealism that Voltaire mistakenly attributed to
    Leibniz.

-   • To see it as part of the indispensable causal means to a greater
    good. (The melodrama must have its villain so that the threatened
    maiden can fully appreciate the delights of a heroic rescue.)

-   • To see it as (noncausally) compensated for in the larger scheme of
    things—that is, either in this world or the next. (This, according
    to Kant, is the rationale for belief in an afterlife.)

-   • To see it as the collateral damage that is unavoidable in even the
    best of possible arrangements contrived with a view to the
    realization of certain, salient positivities.

For the sake of brevity, these four approaches might be designated as
the theories of *illusion, mediation,
compensation*, and *necessitation*. The optimalistic
approach adopts the last of these options, taking the line that natural
evil represents the price of an entry ticket into the best possible
arrangements within the limits of certain constraints. Physical and
moral evils, in sum, are seen as the inescapable consequences that are
bound to occur when beings of limited capacity come to be emplaced
within a world order, whose lawfulness is, on the one hand, a requisite
for their existence but, on the other hand, leads unavoidably to
circumstances disfavorable to the interest and well-being of some.

A world—a viable world setting for intelligent agents—must have a
manifold of laws to provide order in the unfolding of its phenomena. But
in and of themselves, laws and rules will not always produce the best
conceivable results. The player with the best technique may not win, and
the artist who adheres to all the appropriate rules may not produce the
best result. Perhaps the best process will indeed often or usually or
morally produce the best product—but by no means always and markedly.
Optimality of process is compatible with suboptimality of product.

Admittedly, one would not think all that well of a world with splendid
processes but terrible occurrences. But where a sensible optimalism is
concerned, the contrast between process and product is softened by the
consideration that the best process is that which is most apt for and
most favorable to the generation of optimal principles. The point is
that holistic optimality is a complex idea in which *both* process- *and* occurrence-optimality will play a
cooperatively (partially) determent role. Whenever these two desiderata
diverge significantly, some sort of intermediate compromise will have to
be worked out in the interest of a meaningful overall result.

And so, the presently envisioned optimalism geared to the interests of
intelligent beings will gear itself specifically to those laws that
augur good results for intelligent beings. That “best possible” world at
issue is accordingly one that procedural arrangements are such as to
optimize (and indeed maximize) the *chances* of a good result. But
nevertheless, it will not—cannot—guarantee this outcome. It may (and
doubtless will) set the stage in the way most favorable to good outcomes
for intelligent beings, but nevertheless these finite creatures, being
limited alike in knowledge, power, and good will, will all too often
encounter misfortunes in the natural course of world history.

On the other hand, the traditional explanation of *moral* evil attributes this to the
consequences of free will, it being inevitable that creatures of limited
intelligence and endowed with free choice not only can but will act for
wrong as well as right, evil as well as good. Moral evil is thus seen as
the unavoidable price to be paid for a world whose agents combine finite
capabilities with freedom of choice.

To be sure, this line of argument, often cited as the free will defense
of a world with moral evil, has evoked the objection: “Why would an
optimizing agent—God—not have made men such that they always freely
choose the good?”<sup>5</sup> And then there are the calls for
acknowledging that of course there could be such a world—one devoid of
imperfect creatures like you and me. (It is surely not all that pleasant
to think that the world would be a better place without us!) However,
the Leibnizian answer does good service here in its observation that
while God could indeed have created such a world, the result would not
have been as good overall, everything considered— that, thanks to the
intricate interconnection of things in a systemic world-reality, the
comparative price to be paid by replacing imperfect humanity with angels
would be unacceptable because erasing one sort of imperfection from the
world-picture nevertheless engenders a more than compensating
imperfection elsewhere (say by eliminating from the scheme of things any
prospect of moral growth, repentance, and atonement).<sup>6</sup>

Such lines of reasoning can, in principle, account for the *existence *of moral and physical evil
even in a world that is favorable to the welfare of intelligent beings.
However, a further and more difficult problem looms, namely the question
not just of why there is *some*
evil in the world but rather why there is *so much* of it.

The sensible response to theorists of the “I could design it better than
this” school is to process the question: how do you propose to effect
these improvements? Basically there are two options:

-   1\. by *replacement* of (some
    part of) what is there

-   2\. by *emendation* of (some
    part of) what is there

Now at this point it is well to heed the teachings of Leibniz, who
insists that it is the entire history of a thing in this world that
defines and individuates it as what it indeed is, so that (2) is in
effect tantamount to (1).<sup>7</sup>

Accordingly, to improve the world requires repopulating it with
different agents whose choices are indeed appropriate. In the end, it
would mean repopulating reality with angels so as to engender a world
without morally imperfect agents. Such a world would doubtless be a
better world. But would it be *for the
better* that such a world still exists instead of ours?

Here, we arrive at a subtle but important point, namely that it is
emphatically not the same thing to say:

-   • World *A* is better than
    world *B*

-   • It is for the better that world *A* should exist rather than world
    *B*

This raises delicate issues that require a closer look.

The most promising line of thought that is available here was pioneered
in Leibniz’s own theodicidic reflections:

-   • That a world should exist—that some world or other should actually
    be there—is rationally desirable in view of the consideration that
    there are some possible worlds whose overall positive/negative
    balance is favorable in that their positivities outweigh their
    negativities.

-   • If there is to be a world, then it is rationally desirable that
    this should be the best of realizable positivities—that is, it
    should be such that no other possibility outranks it in point of an
    overall positive/negative balance.

On this basis, the world as it is—multitudinous evils included— is not
outranked by any other competitor among the realizable possibilities.

Accordingly, even the very best of possible world arrangements need not
and will not call for being *perfect*. What matters here is, thanks
to the inherent and unavoidable interconnection of things in a complex
world, it may transpire that the only possible way to achieve a
diminution of negativity at one point demands a more than compensatory
argumentation of negativity at another. Even the best of possible worlds
can admit all manner of imperfections: it is just a matter of there
being fewer of them, on balance, than is the case with any of the other
alternatives.

Dr. Pangloss’ anxious pupil pressed him with the question, “If this is
the best of all possible worlds, what are the others like?”<sup>8</sup>
And here, a perfectly good answer was available to the good doctor,
which despite its cogency he was reluctant to give, namely the reply:
“Even worse!” The facile optimism of Dr. Pangloss, the butt of
Voltaire’s *Candide*, misses the
mark if Leibniz (and not some naive and simple-minded Leibnizian) is
intended as its target. Optimalism, to reemphasize, is not really a
matter of unqualified optimism.

## 15
