# 15. Why Philosophy?

It is one of the ironies of twentieth-century philosophy that
self-distrust pervades the entire enterprise. The era’s schools of
thought, otherwise the most varied and reciprocally discordant views,
seem to agree on one—and perhaps only one—significant point: that the
discipline as traditionally understood and historically cultivated is
misguided, profoundly wrong, and in crying need of abandonment. With
remarkable unanimity, the philosophers of the twentieth century have
wanted to replace philosophy as traditionally practiced by something
else. Science, logic, linguistics of some sort, history of ideas,
sociology, and cultural studies have all figured among one theorist or
another’s favored successors. Virtually no one has been content to have
philosophy continue doing business as usual.

In the century’s course, this sort of anti-philosophical view has become
pervasive. Martin Heidegger spoke disdainfully of traditional
metaphysics as “a mere vestige of Christian theology.” And we find
comparably dismissive postures in logical positivism, in Wittgenstein,
in various versions of pragmatism, in analytic philosophy, especially in
ordinary language philosophy, and in Karl Marx’s insistence that while
philosophy’s historic mission has been to understand the world, the real
task is to change it. And then too there is the so-called quietism of
such contemporary Wittgenstein-inspired philosophers as Cora Diamond and
John McDowell.<sup>1</sup>

As an incidental aside, it deserves remark that the term *quietism *is a singularly unfortunate
choice for the sceptical position at issue, given the established usage
of that expression. Here is what the recent *Dictionary of Philosophy and Religion
*ism involves:

-   \[A\] 17th-century devotional and mystical movement within the
    Catholic Church . . . The movement held that the path to the
    discovery of the Divine Will required one to “sell or kill” one’s
    selfconscious will. One’s whole soul may thus be directed to the
    love of God. “Waiting on God” through meditation became central. A
    Quietist maxim held that one moment’s contemplation is worth a
    thousand years’ good works.<sup>2</sup>

Now, whatever the antiphilosophical position of those latter-day,
so-called quietists may have in mind, it is surely not a matter of
prioritizing contemplative meditation over good works.

But issues of terminology aside, the problem with the dismissive
treatment of philosophy is that it fails to do justice to the
consideration that philosophizing is effectively indispensable within
the broader context of rational inquiry. And the point is perhaps most
persuasively made obliquely—through concrete examples rather than
directly through the general principles they instantiate.

So let us begin with an example from epistemology. Consider the
following three contentions:

-   1\. Claims to factual knowledge are sometimes rationally
    appropriate.

-   2\. For rational appropriateness, the specifics of factual knowledge
    must always be certain. (It makes no sense to say, “I know that
    *p* is the case, but there is
    some shadow of doubt about it \[or: it may fail to be so\].”)

-   3\. Claims to absolute, indubitable certainty are never rationally
    warranted and appropriate.

The trouble with this trio is that its contentions are logically
inconsistent. Mere rationality accordingly demands that least one or the
other of its contentions must be rejected. And no matter which way we
turn, we will become enmeshed in a venture of substantive
philosophizing. For in rejecting such a thesis as unacceptable, we
effectively ally ourselves to its negation. And so consider:

1-*rejection* Claims to factual
knowledge are never rationally appropriate. (Scepticism)

2-*rejection* Factual knowledge
need not be certain. (Cognitive Fallibilism)

3-*rejection* Claims to absolute
and indubitable certainty are sometimes appropriate. (Cataleptic
Evidentism)

We come up against a fixed choice. And in every case, we are in effect
caught up in the grasp of one or another tried-and-true philosophical
position.

And this sort of thing is quite general. Thus, consider the following
group of contentions:

-   1\. All occurrences in nature, human acts included, are causally
    determined.

-   2\. Humans can and do act freely on occasion.

-   3\. A genuinely free act cannot be causally determined—for if it
    were so determined, then the act would not be free by virtue of this
    very circumstance.

What we have here is another inconsistent group whose resolution is open
to various alternatives:

1-*rejection* A “voluntaristic”
exemption of free acts from the web of causal determination. (Descartes)

2-*rejection* A “deterministic”
subjection of the human will to causal constraints. (Spinoza)

3-*rejection* A “compatibilism” of
free action and causal determination—for example, via a theory that
distinguishes between inner and outer causal determination, and sees the
former as compatible with freedom. (Leibniz)

Of course, while one or the other of those rejections is mandatory,
there remains a wide latitude of options with respect to the rationale
through which this step is going to be accounted for. (Those
philosopher-indicated, philosophical positions are mere examples of the
sort of story that could be told here.) But the key fact remains that no
matter what sort of account one is prepared to give, the story being
told will be told in the way of philosophy. Whatever sort of rationale
we offer for that rejection is going to be philosophical in its nature
and bearing.

Or again, consider yet another example:

-   1\. Acting unjustly is always impermissible.

-   2\. In some—inherently dilemmatic—circumstances an unjust action is
    unavoidable.

-   3\. An act that is unavoidable (in the circumstances) cannot be
    impermissible (in those circumstances).

Here too, we have an inconsistent triad. A rational person cannot but
abandon one or the other of them. But in view of their supposed
rationality, our rejector will be committed to acting for a reason.
Their very rationality binds them to having some sort of rationale for
their proceeding. And once the rejector offers an explanatory rationale
for this rejection, he or she is doing philosophy.

Thus, for example, we might have the following situation:

1-*rejection* Acting unjustly is
sometimes permissible. The least of evils is always permissible, and in
suitably unfortunate circumstances, this least of evils can involve some
element of injustice.

2-*rejection* The realizability of
just action is never unavailable. The best available alternative for
acting can never count as unjust.

3-*rejection* An act that is
unavoidable can indeed be impermissible. There can be moral dilemmas
that force a choice between impermissible acts.

And in each case, the rationale at issue provides for an enmeshment in
what cannot but count as a philosophical position.

So here is the situation. For starters, we are confronted with a group
of collectively incompatible propositions. And these propositions can be
devoid of any transparent philosophical involvement. But given their
collective inconsistency, one or the other of them has to go. And
providing a plausible rationale for the specific rejection of any
particular one of them is inevitably going to involve deliberations of
the sort that are quintessentially philosophical.

To be sure, faced with the imperative of rejection in such cases, a
theorist may go all-out and take the following line:

I shall never accept anything because no contention is ever acceptable.
(Scepticism)

Or perhaps somewhat more restrictedly:

I shall never accept anything that has any bearing on philosophical
matters. (Since virtually every fact has some degree of philosophical
relevancy, this sort of scepticism has a tendency to transmute into the
preceding, seemingly more radical sort.)

Now, when any position along such lines is rendered rational by being
fitted out with a plausible rationale of some sort, then we at once find
ourselves back at philosophizing—deeply engaged in the epistemology of
rational acceptance. And we then face the problem that the sort of
broadcast approach represented by that envisioned reaction is not really
appropriate because the rejection of *specific* contentions of the sort at
issue in our apories calls for the deployment of case-specific
consideration. In matters of specific rejection, a wholesale approach
through guilt by association will hardly be justifiable. Those sceptical
antiphilosophers effectively say:

A plague in all your houses. The very philosophical bearing (oblique or
otherwise) that those inconsistent clusters involve brings all of these
conflicting theses within the scope of my an-tiphilosophical
proscription. I thus reject the whole lot of them without further ado or
scrutiny. I see no reason to confront them individually in their
idiosyncratic detail.

However, this seemingly plausible stance fails to meet the needs of the
situation. For the very dialectic of rational controversy precludes this
tactic. Consider an illustration. You say: “All Cretans are liars.” I
present you with a particular Cretan and say: “This man is no liar.”
There is now no longer any option but to look into the mouth of this
particular gift horse. It will no longer do to remain at the level of
wholesale generality and say: “But he is a Cretan and all Cretans are
liars.” It is exactly this sort of generalization that is in question.

The fact of it is that the dialectic of rational controversy prioritizes
specifics over generalities.<sup>3</sup> In this sort of situation,
presumption stands on the side of the particular and the burden of proof
rests on the side of generality. So the antiphilosopher has no viable
excuse for refusing to engage the details of particular cases.

The overall lesson is as follows: If you are going to be rational, then
you are bound to confront some contentions that you cannot but reject,
and these contentions are such that the moment you try to provide *grounds* for rejection and set out some
sort of *rationale* for it,
then—like it or not—you are going to be involved in philosophizing.
Philosophy, that is to say, is effectively unavoidable in the rational
scheme of things as long as we engage in the quest for cogent answers to
large questions.

There is, of course, the theoretical possibility of taking the stance
that was indeed advocated by some of the leading sceptics of classical
antiquity: namely, that of living *adoxastos* (without doctrine), going
along in life doing all sorts of things without worrying about the rhyme
or reason of it, following the drift of inclination, habit, or custom.
Effectively, one says: “I have better things to do than to concern
myself about the reasons for what I do or think.” This is, no doubt, a
stance one can possibly take, and there are doubtless many people who
take it. But it is clear that such an abandonment of reason is not a
stance that is *rationally*
defensible. It is not that people cannot refrain from philosophizing,
but rather that rational people really have no cogent grounds for urging
such abandonment.
