# 9. The Demands of Morality

## The Functional/Purposive Nature of Morality

The pervasive relativism of the age views moral principles and standards
as little more than a matter of custom based on practical convenience,
like the rules of the road for driving—useful devices to diminish
conflict in contexts of human interaction, but lacking any deeper
validation and legitimacy, and certainly without any claims to
universality. Morality as regarded from this angle is predicated on
local custom, as part of the mores of the group. And any such behavioral
code is as good as any other: it is simply a matter of “When in Rome do
as the Romans do.” All moralities are created equal. There is no place
for moral objectivity.

And so, nowadays a widespread but nevertheless unfortunate tendency to
deny the possibility of rational controversy about moral matters
prevails, relegating morality to the never-never land of matters of
taste, feeling, or otherwise discursively insupportable opinion. Such a
view is profoundly inappropriate. But once one recognizes the *functional* aspect of morality—as
inculcating actions that safeguard the real interest of people—then
moral issues become open to rational deliberation.<sup>1</sup> This
functional aspect of morality, its very nature representing an
inherently appropriate, end-oriented project, blocks the prospect of
indifferentism or of a relativistically detached view of morality as a
mere matter of individual inclination or of “the customs of the tribe.”

But such a radically subjective view along the lines that “With moral
issues there is only what people think; there just are no objective
facts of the matter” is ultimately untenable for anyone who, rejecting
nihilism, gives credence to some sort of morality or other. For one
cannot consistently look on one’s own moral convictions as “merely
matters of opinion.” In doing this one would thereby ipso facto fail to
accept them as such—that is, as *moral* convictions. In view of what can
possibly qualify as such, it lies in the very nature of our moral
judgments that we regard them as justified via a rationale regarding
what is required by due heed of the interests of people.

Morality, after all, is an end-governed purposive enterprise—one that is
structured by its having a characteristic functional mission of
transparent appropriateness. For it is morality’s object to equip people
with a body of norms (rules and values) that make for peaceful and
collectively satisfying coexistence by facilitating their living
together and interacting in a way that is productive for the realization
of the “general benefit”—of the wider community as a whole. The pursuit
of righteousness that constitutes morality is like the pursuit of health
that constitutes medicine—both are projects with an inherent teleology
of their own, geared to fostering patterns of action and interaction
that promote the best interests of people in general.

The functional nature of morality means that being *thought* to be morally appropriate no
more makes a certain action to be so than being *thought* to be medically effective or
transportationally efficient would render a certain practice to be so.
The claim that a rule or practice is morally appropriate—that in the
conditions prevailing in a society it is effective in serving and
enhancing the real interests of people in general—is thoroughly
objective and “factual.” One is thus rationally constrained by
considerations of mere self-consistency to see one’s own moral position
as rationally superior to the available alternatives. If one did not
take this stance—did not deem one’s moral position to be effectively
optimal—then one could not see oneself as rationally justified in
adopting it, so that it would, in consequence, fail to be one’s own real
moral position, contrary to hypothesis.<sup>2</sup> Because the claims
of morality are categorical, to see morality as subjective is in fact to
abandon it.

The validity of most moral appraisals is accordingly something that is
objectively determinable and nowise lies in the eye of the beholder. For
someone to say, “You acted wrongly in stealing that money” is *not* simply for them to assert that you
stole the money and additionally to evince disapprobation and urge a
different sort of future conduct, but rather—and most importantly—to
*indicate a reason* for acting
differently. For the claim implies that your act instantiates a type of
behavior (namely, stealing) that does injury to the legitimate interests
of others. And this issue of human needs and benefits, of people’s real
*interests*, such as their
physical and psychological well being, is not a matter of subjective
reaction. What is in our interest—what is *advantageous* for our long-term,
overall physical and psychological well-being, given the sorts of
creatures we are—is in large measure a factual issue capable of
empirical inquiry that lies open to general, public investigation.

Morality is by its very nature geared to safeguarding the interests of
others as best we can manage it in prevailing circumstances. And people
do not *choose* what it is that is
in their interests.<sup>3</sup>

After all, physicians, parents, public officials, and others constantly
concern themselves with issues of what is good for peo-ple—what enables
them to thrive and lead satisfying lives. People themselves are by no
means themselves the definitive authorities regarding what is in their
interests—their doctor, lawyer, or financial advisor can know a good
deal more about these interests than the individuals themselves. In the
final analysis, the objectivity of *moral* evaluations thus resides in the
very nature of the issue. People are no doubt the definitive authorities
regarding what *pleases* them, but
certainly not regarding what *benefi
ts* them. And this objectivity of people’s interests carries in
its wake also the objectivity of interest promotion—and thus of
morality. We thus cannot detach rational justification from objective
validity in the moral sphere, because to say that a person is
(rationally) justified in making a judgment is to say that he or she is
(rationally) entitled to take it to be objectively true or correct. Nor
can we detach objective validity from factuality, for where there is no
appropriate claim to objective factuality (no “fact of the matter”),
there can be no justification or endorsement either—though, to be sure,
the facts of the matter may happen to be *evaluative* facts.

What renders morality objective is thus the fact that moral evaluations
can—and should—be validated as cogent through considerations of
purposive efficacy. To claim that someone ought (or ought not) to act in
a certain way is thereby to commit oneself to the availability of a
*good reason* why one should or
should not do so, and a reason that is not only good but good in a
certain mode, the moral mode, shows that this sort of action is bound up
with due care for the interest of others. And this matter of interest is
something open to general view—something that can be investigated by
other people as readily as by the agent. For since people’s (real)
interests are rooted in their needs, the morally crucial circumstance
that certain modes of action are conducive and others deleterious to the
best interests of people is something that can be investigated,
evidentiated, and sensibly assessed by the standards generally prevalent
in rational discussion and controversy. The matters are not questions of
feeling or taste but represent something objective about which one can
deliberate and argue in a sensible way on the basis of reasons whose
cogency are, or should be, accessible to anyone. The modes of behavior
of people that render life in their communities “nasty, brutish, and
short” (or indeed even merely more difficult and less pleasant than need
be) generally admit of straightforward and unproblematic discernment.

## Uniformity Despite Diversity

And yet there are some complications here. For moral *pluralism* is unavoidable, and moral
codes can appropriately differ from one society to another. Do these
facts not entail an indifferentist relativism to the effect that, in
principle, “anything goes,” by making morality into what is ultimately
just a matter of local custom?

By no means! All modes of morality have important elements in common
simply in view of the fact that *morality* is at issue. Since (by
hypothesis) they all qualify as “modes of morality,” they are bound to
encompass such fundamental considerations as the following:

-   • What people do matters. Some actions are right, others wrong, some
    acceptable and some not. There is an important difference here.

-   • This is not just a product of convention, custom, and the thing to
    do. Violations of moral principles are not just offenses against
    sensibility but against people’s just claims in matters where
    people’s actual well-being is at stake.

-   • In violating the moral rules, we inflict injury on the life,
    welfare, or otherwise legitimate interests of others—either actually
    or by way of putting them unjustifiably at risk.

Attunement to considerations of this sort is *by defi nition* essential to any system
of “morality,” and it serves to provide the basis for imperatives like:
“Do not simply ignore other people’s rights and claims in your own
deliberations,” “Do not inflict needless pain on people,” “Honor the
legitimate interests of others,” “Do not take what rightfully belongs to
others without their appropriately secured consent,” “Do not wantonly
break promises,” “Do not cause someone anguish simply for your own
amusement.” In the context of *morality*, principles and rules of this
sort are universal and absolute. They are of the very essence of
morality; in abandoning them we would withdraw from a discussion of
*morality* and would, in effect,
be changing the subject. What we say might be interesting—and even
true—but it would deal with another topic.

“But moral objectivity is surely counterindicated by the circumstance
that one cannot validly criticize the moral code of a society by any
‘external’ criteria.” By no means! Whether a certain operational code is
intended within the ambit of its social context to operate as a moral
code may well be a proper subject of discussion and controversy. But
once it is settled that it is indeed a *moral* code that is at issue, then in
view of that very fact one can certainly bring principles of critical
evaluation to bear. For at this point the question becomes paramount
whether—and how effectively—this code accomplishes for its society those
functions for which moral codes are instituted among men—to constrain
their interactions into lines that safeguard their best interests.

When we are assessing a moral code in this way, we are *not* simply exercising a cultural
imperialism by judging it against our own in asking how concordant or
discordant it is with the prevailing moral standards of our environing
group. We are judging it, rather, against those universal and “absolute”
standards in terms of which the adequacy of any code, our own included,
must be appraised. The evaluation of appropriateness is not one of ours
against theirs, but one of judging *both* ours and theirs by a common,
generic standard. What makes an action right or wrong (as the case may
be) is just exactly the issue of whether doing the sort of thing at
issue injures or protects the interests of all the agents concerned. (To
reemphasize: morality is by definition geared to the benefit of rational
agents, even as refrigeration is by definition geared to
cooling.<sup>4</sup>) This is part and parcel of the very meaning of
“morally right” and “morally wrong.” And it renders judgment in these
matters factual, objective, and rationally disputable.

Morality, to reemphasize, is a particular, well-defined sort of
purposive project, whose cohesive unity as such resides in its inherent
function of molding the behavior of people in line with a care for one
another’s interests. Even as there are many ways to build houses, fuel
automobiles, and so on, so there are various ways of being moral. But
that surely does not mean that there is no overarching unity of goals,
functions, principles, and values to lend a definitional cohesion to the
enterprise. Moral behavior can take many forms, but morality itself is a
uniform project! But in fact, moral variability is more apparent than
real—an absolute uniformity does, and must, prevail at the level of
fundamentals. “Act with due heed of the interests of others” is a
universal and absolute moral principle whose working out in different
contexts will, to be sure, very much depend on just exactly how the
interests of people happen to be reciprocally intertwined. But despite
the diversity of the substantive moral codes of different societies, the
basic overarching principles of morality are uniform and
invariant—inherent in the very idea of what morality is all about.

Accordingly, different “moralities” are simply diverse implementations
of certain uniform, overarching moral *principles*. There is

ample room for situational variation and pluralism in response to the
question: “What is the morally appropriate thing to do?” But there is no
such room with respect to: “What is morality—and what principles are at
issue here?” The concept of morality and its contents are fixed by the
*questioner’s prerogative*
inherent in the principle that it is the inquirer’s own conception of
the matter that determines what is at issue. In *our deliberations*

*our conception* of “morality” and
its governing principles that is conclusive for what is at issue. When
*we* engage in deliberations about
morality—be it our own or that of others—it is “morality” *as we understand it* that figures in
this discussion.<sup>5</sup> And this circumstance of theoretic fixity
engenders the stability of those project-definitive moral principles.

## The Hierarchical Dimension

But how could one plausibly pivot the issue of moral objectivity on the
very idea of what “morality” is all about? After all, different people
have different ideas about this. Of course, different people do think
differently about morality, even as they think differently about dogs or
automobiles. But that’s basically irrelevant. What is at issue with
“morality” as such does not lie with you or with me but with all of us.
What matters here is how the word is actually used in the community—in
the language in which our discussion of the issue transpires. What
matters is not what people think about the topic, but how they use the
terminology that defines it.

Yet how can this fixity of the conception of morality and of the basic
principles that are at issue within it—inherent in the monolithic
uniformity of “what *morality*
is”—be reconciled with the plain fact of a pluralistic diversity of
(presumably cogent) answers to the question: “What is it moral to do?”
How can such an absolutism of morality’s fundamentals coexist with the
patent relativity of moral evaluations across different times and
cultures?

At this point we have to return to the idea of a “cultivation
hierarchy.” For in the case of normality too, we have to deal with a
descending hierarchy of characterizing aims, fundamental principles and
values, governing rules, implementing directives, and (finally)
particular rulings (see display 9.1). And the answer to our question

**Display 9.1.** The Stratification Levels of the Implementation Hierarchy for Moral Norms

|         |                                                 |                                                             |
|---------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| level 1 | characterizing aims                             | “due care for the best interests of others”                 |
| level 2 | governing principles and values                 | “honesty,” “candor”                                         |
| level 3 | governing rules                                 | “Do not lie,” “Speak truthfully”                            |
| level 4 | operating directives (groundrules of procedure) | “When declaring what you believe do not do so misleadingly” |
| level 5 | particular rulings                              | “Answer Jones truthfully (as best you can)”                 |

lies in the fact that several intermediate levels or strata inevitably
separate those overarching “basic principles of morality” from any
concrete judgments about what it is moral to do.

At the topmost level we have the defining aims of morality, the
objectives that identify the moral enterprise as such by determining its
nature and specifying the aims and objectives that characterize what
morality is all about (for example: “Act with a view to safeguarding the
valid interests of others.”). These characterizing aims of morality
represent the overarching “defining objectives” of the entire enterprise
that characterize the project as such. They explicate what is at issue
when it is *morality* (rather than
basket weaving) that we propose to concern ourselves with. In spelling
out the fundamental idea of what morality is all about, these top-level
norms provide the ultimate reference points of moral deliberation. And
they are unalterably fixed—inherent in the very nature of the subject.

And these fundamental “aims of the enterprise” also fix the basic
principles and controlling values that delineate the moral virtues
(honesty, trustworthiness, civility, probity, and the rest). Such values
define the salient norms that link the abstract characterizing aims to
an operational morality of specific governing rules. The norms embodied
in these basic principles and values are “universal” and “absolute,”
serving as parts of what makes morality the thing it is (examples
include: “Do not violate the duly established rights and claims of
others.” “Do not unjustly deprive others of life, liberty, or
opportunity for self-development.” “Do not tell self-serving
falsehoods.” “Do not deliberately aid and abet others in wrongdoing.”).
Accordingly, these high-level principles also lie fixedly in the very
nature of the subject. At these two topmost levels, then, there is
simply no room for any “disagreement about morality.” Here disagreement
betokens misunderstanding: if one does not recognize the fundamental
aims, principles, and values that characterize the moral enterprise as
such, then one is simply talking about something else altogether. In any
discussion of *morality* these
things are simply *givens.* But
this situation changes as one moves further down the list and takes
additional steps in the descent to concreteness.

At the next (third) level, we encounter the governing rules and
regulations that direct the specifically moral transaction of affairs.
Here, we have the generalities of the usual and accustomed sort: “Do not
lie,” “Do not cheat,” “Do not steal,” and so on. At this level we come
to the imperatives that guide our deliberations and decisions. Like the
Ten Commandments, they set out the controlling dos and don’ts of the
moral practice of a community, providing us with general guidance in
moral conduct. Here, variability begins to set in. For these rules
implement morality’s ruling principles at the concrete level of
recommended practices in a way that admits of adjustment to the fluid
circumstances of local conditions. A generalized moral rule on the order
of the injunction “Do not steal” (or “Do not take something that
properly belongs to another”) is in itself still something abstract and
schematic. It still requires the concrete fleshing out of substantive
implementing specifications to tell us what sorts of things make for
“proper ownership.” And so the next (fourth) level presents us with the
ground rules of procedure or implementing directives that furnish our
working guidelines and criteria for the moral resolution of various
types of cases (for example: “Killing is wrong except in cases of
self-defense or under legal mandate as in war or execution.”). At this
level of implementing standards and criteria, the variability of local
practice comes to the fore, so that there is further room for
pluralistic diversification here; we ourselves implement “Do not lie,
avoid telling falsehoods,” by way of “Say what you believe (to be the
case),” but a society of convinced sceptics could not do so. The
operating ground rules of level four thus incorporate the relative,
situational standards and criteria though which the more abstract,
higher-level rules get their grip on concrete situations. Those general
rules themselves are too abstract—too loose or general to be applicable
without further directions to give them a purchase on concrete
situations. They must be given concrete implementation with reference to
local—and thus variable—arrangements.<sup>6</sup>

Finally, at the lowest (fifth) level, we come to the particular moral
rulings, the individual resolutions with respect to the specific issues
arising in concrete cases (for example: “It was wicked of Lady Macbeth
to incite her husband to kill the king.”).

In such an “implementation hierarchy,” we thus descend from what is
abstractly and fixedly universal to what is concrete and variable. Level
two is contained in level one simply by way of exfoliative
“explication.” But as we move downward, past level three to the
implementing specifications of level four, there is—increasingly—a
looseness or “slack” that makes room for the specific and variable ways
of different groups for implementing the particular higher-level
objective at issue.

The entire hierarchy contention culminates in a single, overreaching
ruling imperative (“Support the interests of people!”) that stands
correlative with an enterprise-determinative value (“the best interests
of people”). This overarching concern does not itself stand subordinate
to further moral rules. After all, it is only possible up to a certain
point that we can have rules for applying rules and principles for
applying principles. The process of validating lower-level
considerations in terms of higher-level ones must come to a stop
somewhere. And with such implementation hierarchies, it is the
overarching controlling teleology of “the aim of the entire enterprise”
that gives at once unity and determinatives to the justificatory
venture.

Note the element of abstract generality imposes the need for some
suitable qualification above the bottom level of concrete particularity.
Here some sort of qualification like “needless” or “unnecessary” or
“inappropriate” (in their contraries) will be operative. The sorts of
things that keep harms and so forth from being needless are clear
enough. They include qualifications like “merely for personal
convenience,” “for one’s own gain,” “for one’s own pleasure,” “out of
perversity or ill will,” and so on. To be sure, the list of inadequate
reasons that render harms morally inappropriate is potentially endless,
but the sort of thing at issue is clear enough to anyone but a moral
imbecile.

Overall then, we have to deal with a chain of subordination linkages
that connect a concrete moral judgment—a particular moral act
recommendation or command—with the ultimate defining aim of the moral
enterprise. The long and short of it is that any appropriate moral
injunction must derive its validity through being an appropriate
instantiation or concretization of an overarching principle of universal
(unrestricted) validity under which it is subsumed. It must, in short,
represent a circumstantially appropriate implementation of the fixities
of absolute morality. Thus, even as in Roman Catholic theology there is
a “hierarchy of truths” that places different teachings of the Church at
different levels of doctoral essentiality or fun-damentality, so in the
present context there is a comparable hierarchy of imperatival strata
that place different injunctions at different levels of fundamentality
in the moral enterprise, with some (the basic principles) as, in this
setting, absolute and others as variable and relative to context and
circumstance. Fundamentals are fixed as essential to the moral domain as
such, but agreement on concrete issues is itself something more
marginal.

The crucial fact is that one moral value—fairness, for example— can come
into operation very differently in different contexts. In an economy of
abundance it may militate for equality of shares and in an economy of
scarcity for equality of opportunity. The particular circumstances that
characterize a context of operation may importantly condition the way in
which a moral value or principle can (appropriately) be applied. We
cannot expect to encounter any universal consensus across cultural and
temporal divides: physicians of different eras are (like moralists)
bound to differ—and to some extent those of different cultures as well.
There is—inevitably—substantial variability among particular groups,
each with its own varying ideas conditioned by locally prevailing
conditions and circumstances. But the impact of low-level variation is
mitigated by the fact that justification at lower levels proceeds
throughout with reference to superordinated standards in a way that
makes for higher-level uniformity. Uniform high-level principles will
have to be implemented differently in different circumstances. Medicine
and morality alike are complex projects unified and integrated amid the
welter of changing conditions and circumstances by the determinative
predominance of high-level principles.

At the level of basic principles, then, morality is absolute; its
strictures at this level hold good for everyone, for all rational
agents. And lower-level rules and rulings must—if valid—preserve a
“linkage of subsumption” to those highest-level abstractions, a linkage
mediated by way of more restrictive modes of implementation. These
implementing rules involve contextual relativity—coordination with
contingently variable (setting-dependent and era- and culture-variable)
circumstances and situations. Thus while moral objectives and basic
principles—those top levels of the hierarchy of moral norms—are absolute
and universal, “slack” arises as we move further down the ladder,
leaving room for (quite appropriate) contextual variability and
differentiation. “Do not unjustifiably take the property of another for
your own use” is an unquestionably valid principle of absolute morality.
But it avails nothing until such time as there are means for determining
what is “the property of another” and what constitutes “unjustified
taking.” “Don’t break promises merely for your own convenience” is a
universal moral rule and as such is global and absolute. But what sorts
of practices constitute making a valid promise is something that is
largely determined through localized social conventions and personal
principles. Local context—variable history, tradition,
expectation-defining legal systems, evaluative commitments, and the
like—thus allows for substantial variability at the level of operational
rules and codes, of moral practices.

And so, the increasing looseness of fit or “slack” that we encounter as
we move toward the bottom level of concreteness makes for considerable
context-specific variability. Here, underdetermination may come into
play through the existence of plausible reasons for divergent positions
without any prospect of categorical resolution one way or the other. A
situation of moral indeterminacy may arise where each one of several
equally cogent positions can come into irreconcilable conflict. The same
respect for life that leads one person to take up arms against a tyrant
may lead another to walk in the path of pacifism and self-sacrifice.
Either position is defensible, and both deserve moral recognition and
respect: in a dispute between these two variant appraisals there is no
single unique right answer. In settings of scarcity (battlefield triage
situations, for example), there may well be very real morally laden
choices—the relief of suffering versus the promotion of survival, for
instance—where there is no definitive right or wrong.<sup>7</sup>

Morality’s characteristic universality is thus inevitably mediated
through factors that are variable, conventional, and culturally
relative. That project-definitive general principle must be implemented
in concrete circumstances and be adapted to them, even as the idea of
hospitality towards strangers, for example, has to function differently
in European and in Bedouin culture, seeing that deserts and cities are
very different human environments. Still, the deeper moral principles
that underlie the moral rules and practices of a society (“Even
strangers have their due—they too are entitled to respect, to courtesy,
and to assistance in need”) transcend the customs of any particular
community. As concerns morality, culture is indeed a localizing and
differentiating agent—but one that merely conditions those fundamental
invariants that are inherent in the very conception of morality as such.

## Against Moral Relativism (Anthropological and Others)

Moral relativism proclaims: “We have *our* moral convictions (rules,
standards, values) and they have *theirs*. One is every bit as good as
the other. To each his own. Nobody is in a position to criticize or
condemn the moral views of others.”<sup>8</sup> But to take this line at
every point as regards moral matters is simply to abandon the very idea
of morality. Such a position does indeed hold true with respect to *mores*—we eat with cutlery, they with
chopsticks; we sleep on beds, they in hammocks; we speak one language,
they another—each with equal propriety. But this indifference does *not* hold for matters of moral
principle. “We treat strangers with respect; they (those cannibals) eat
them. We treat the handicapped kindly; they drown them at sea. We treat
darker-skinned humans as equals; they as inferiors. And the one way of
proceeding is just as appropriate as the other. It’s all just a matter
of local custom.” Rubbish! It simply is not true from the moral
standpoint! If crass selfishness, pointless maltreatment, wanton deceit,
or the infliction of needless pain is wrong for us, it is wrong for them
too—and conversely. At the level of fundamentals, matters of moral
principle are the same for everyone. What holds good for us holds good
for them too. A code that sees every mode of behavior as
indifferent—every sort of action as equally acceptable— is by its very
nature not a moral code (whatever else it may be).

But what of those cases in which doing the moral thing exacts a price in
terms of selfish personal advantage?

One must look on this issue as being much like any other conflict of
interest situation. I simply have to decide where my priorities ought to
lie, whether with morality or with selfish advantage. And this decision
has larger implications for us. For it is not *just* a matter of deciding what I want
to do in this case. Because of the divisive nature of the case, it is a
matter of deciding *what sort of person
I am to be*. For in acting immorally I produce two sorts of
results:

-   • The *direct* result of my
    action—presumably certain gains that it would secure for me;

-   • The *indirect* result of
    making me a person of a certain sort, that is, someone who would do
    *that* sort of thing to
    realize that sort of result.

In so acting, I make myself into a person of a certain sort. Even if no
one else knows it, the fact still remains that that’s what I’ve done—
I’ve made myself into a person who would do that sort of thing in order
to realize that sort of benefit. And my self-respect is (or *ought *to be) of such great value to me
that the advantages I could secure by immoral action do not countervail
against the losses of self-respect that would be involved.

In acting in a way that I recognize to be wrong, I sustain a loss and
(if my head is screwed on straight) sustain it where it counts the
most—in my own sight. A vicarious concern for others enriches one’s life
and makes one not only a better but also a more fully developed person.

Doing what one wants is not automatically a matter of selfishness; that
very much depends on what it is that one happens to want. As one recent
author points out “while it does sound distinctly odd to say that a
person embarked on a life of self-sacrifice and devotion to others is
pursuing his own good,” there is nothing odd about saying that such a
person is leading a life where (as he sees the matter) it is good for
him to lead.<sup>9</sup> One’s vision of the good can (and should)
include arrangements where oneself is not cast in the role of a prime
beneficiary.

Surely, there is nothing in any way inherently unreasonable or
irrational about a selfless concern for others. Indeed, there is no
adequate reason for calling a man unreasonable if his actions militate
against his own narrowly selfish advantage. To be sure, a man will be
unreasonable, indeed irrational, if his actions systematically impede
his objectives. But—convenient oversimplification apart—there is no
justification whatever for holding that his *only* rationally legitimate objectives
are of the selfish or self-interested sort. It is a travesty for this
concept to construe *rationality*
in terms of prudential self-advantage. Neither for individuals nor for
societies is “the pursuit of happiness” (construed as narrowly selfish
pleasure) an appropriate guide to action; its dictates must be
counterbalanced by recognizing the importance of doing those things
that, in after years, we can look back with justifiable pride.

Just as it is rational to do the *prudent* thing (such as enduring the
dentist’s ministrations) even if doing so goes against one’s immediate
selfish desires, so the same holds with doing the *moral* thing. Being a moral person is
prominent among our (real) interests. And so, confronted with the choice
between the moral and the narrowly selfish, our interests *automatically* lie on the side of the
moral choice. Morality is indeed a matter of self-interest, but only if
one is prepared to distinguish true (real) from merely apparent
interests (“what’s good for me” from “what one wants”).

But then what of the question: “Why be moral—why do what morality
demands?” Here there is in fact a grave ambiguity because the question,
“Why be moral?” can be construed in three importantly different ways:

-   1\. from the moral point of view;

-   2\. from the standpoint of *enlightened* prudence, of an
    intelligent heed of our real interests;

-   3\. from the standpoint of the selfishness of satisfying our
    desires.

Here as elsewhere, the answer we arrive at depends on which
interpretation of the question we use. If we use (1), the answer is
simply that morality itself demands it. And if we use (2), the answer is
that enlightened prudence also demands it, that our real and truly
“best” interests require it for the reasons indicated above. But if we
use (3), the situation is quite different. There is no earthly way to
validate morality from the standpoint of selfishness, of self-interest
*narrowly *construed, in terms of
the satisfaction of mere (raw and unevaluated) desires. And this is to
be welcomed, not lamented—at any rate from the moral point of view—for
the very reason that the being of morality lies in countervailing the
siren call of immediate gratification.

All considered, it is point (2) that is crucial here. And in its light
the basic question of the relation of morality and rationality may be
resolved via the argument:

-   1\. The intelligent cultivation of one’s *real* self-interest is
    quintes-sentially rational.

-   2\. It is to one’s real self-interest to act morally—even if doing
    so goes against one’s immediate selfish desires.

Therefore: It is rational to be moral

There is nothing all that complex about the relationship of rationality
and morality. We have, more or less by definition:

*Rationality*: doing the *intelligent* thing (in matters of
belief, action, and evaluation).

*Morality*: doing the *right* thing (in regard to action
affecting the interest of others).

The concordance of morality with rationality is established through the
fact that the intelligent thing to do and the right thing to do will
ultimately coincide.

To forego rationality is to abandon (as best we can tell) the
intelligent cultivation of appropriate interests. Given the fact that we
have a genuine interest in being the sort of person who cares for the
interests of others, morality is part of the package. The rational
person will also be morally good—conscientious, compassionate,
kind—be-cause their own best interest is served thereby, seeing that
they have a real and sizable stake in being the sort of person who can
take rational satisfaction in the contemplation of their own way of
life.

“But what if I just don’t happen to be the sort of person who gets
satisfaction from contemplating the quality of my life and its
constituent actions?” Then not only can we feel sorry for you, but we
are (normatively) justified in setting your stake in the matter as
naught. Your stance is like that of someone who says: “Appropriate human
values mean nothing to me.” Your position seems afraid of that most
basic of rational imperatives: to realize oneself as the sort of
creature one happens to be. In being profoundly unintelligent, such a
stance is profoundly irrational as well.

In the final analysis then, to act immorally is to act unreasonably
because it compromises one’s true interests—partly for Hobbesian reasons
(fouling one’s own nest) and partly for Platonic ones (failing to
realize one’s human potential).

Such a position is substantially identical with that which Plato
attributed of Socrates in the *Republic*: that being unjust and
immoral—regardless of what immediate benefits it may gain for us—is
always ultimately disadvantageous because of the damage it does to our
character (or *psyche*) by making
us into the sort of person we ourselves cannot really respect. (“What
profiteth a man if he should gain the whole world, but lose his own
soul?”) On such a view it is not the case that the impetus of morality
subsists through its *rewards*:
either intrinsic (“virtue is its own reward”) or prudential. We should
be moral not because it (somehow) pays, but because we *ought* to be so as part and parcel of
our ontological obligation towards realizing ourselves as the sort of
rational beings that can live contentedly within ourselves.<sup>10</sup>

## The Rationale of Morality

Can morality be grounded in human nature—in some special facet or
feature of our condition as rational beings? Clearly, morality does
*not* inhere in the realization of
human potential as such, no questions asked. For every person has a
potential for *both* good and
evil— in principle, each has it in them to become a saint or a sinner.

Discerning our specifically *good*
potentialities requires more than a knowledge of human nature as such;
it requires taking a view of the good of human beings—a normative
philosophical anthropology. Of course, it is better to be healthy, to be
happy, to understand what goes on, and the like. But this still leaves
untouched the pivotal question of what endows life with worth and
value—what are the conditions that make for a rewarding and worthwhile
life? This issue of humans flourishing will inevitably involve such
things as: using one’s intelligence, developing (some of) one’s
productive talents and abilities, making a constructive contribution to
the world’s work, fostering the good potential of others, achieving and
diffusing happiness, and taking heed for the interests of others. The
good potentialities, in sum, are exactly those in whose cultivation and
development a rational agent can take reflective self-satisfaction,
those which help us most fully to realize ourselves as the sort of being
we should ideally aspire to be. And it is here that morality’s
insistence on a concern for the legitimate interests of others can find
a grip. The crux is simply the matter of cultivating legitimate
interests. And we cannot do this for ourselves without due care for
cultivating our specifically positive potentialities—those things that
are inherently worthwhile.

This approach to deontology thus ultimately grounds the obligatoriness
of moral injunctions in axiology—in considerations of value. For it is
the metaphysics of value—and not moral theory per se—that teaches us
that, other things being equal, knowledge is better than ignorance, or
pleasure than pain, or compassion than needless indifference. And what
ultimately validates our moral concern for the interests of others is
just exactly this ontological commitment to the enhancement of value, a
commitment that is inseparably linked to our own value as free rational
agents.

We ought to be moral because we ought not lose out on the opportunities
for realizing the positive good put at our disposal by our condition in
the world’s scheme of things. Immorality is wasteful and foolish, and
foolishness is a betrayal of the intelligence that fate accords us.

We are embarking here on a broadly economic approach—but one that
proceeds in terms of a value theory that envisions a generalized
“economy of values” and from whose standpoint the traditional economic
values (the standard economic costs and benefits) are merely a rather
special case. Such an axiological approach sees moral rationality as an
integral component of that wider rationality that calls for the
effective deployment of limited resources. (Observe that such a
deontological approach contrasts starkly with a utilitarian morality, in
that the latter pivots morality on *happiness* or “utility” but the former
on *value enhancement*.)

Heeding the strictures of morality is thus part and parcel of a rational
being’s cultivation of the good. For us rational creatures, morality
(the due care for the interests of rational beings) is an integral
component of reason’s commitment to the enhancement of value. Reason’s
commitment to the value of rationality accordingly carries a commitment
to morality in its wake. The obligatoriness of morality ultimately takes
root in an *ontological*
imperative to value realization with respect to the self and the world
that is incumbent on free agents as such. With this ontological
perspective, the ultimate basis of moral duty is rooted in the
obligation we have as rational agents (towards ourselves and the world
at large) to make the most and best of our opportunities for
self-development. For those who might ask, “Why cultivate the things
that certainly have value?” the answer is, because it is the rational
thing to do.

And so, in the final analysis, one ought to be moral for the same sort
of reason one ought to make use of life’s opportunities in general—one’s
intelligence, for example, or one’s other constructive talents. For in
failing to do this, we throw away chances to make something of ourselves
by way of contributing to the world’s good, thereby failing to realize
our potential. The violation of moral principles thus stands coordinate
with wanton wastefulness of any sort. The crux is not so much
self-realization as self-optimization, and what is at issue with failure
is not merely a loss but a violation of duty as well. To recognize
something as valuable is, with the rational person, to enter into
certain obligations in its regard (such as favoring it over contrary
alternatives, other things equal).

To be sure, it must be stressed that the obligation to morality—to
conduct our interpersonal affairs appropriately by heeding the interests
of others—is our only ontological obligation. The epistemic obligation
to conduct our cognitive affairs appropriately—to inquire, to broaden
our knowledge, to pursue the truth by believing only those things that
*ought* (epistemically deserve) to
be believed in the cir-cumstances—is another example and the Kantian
duty to develop (at least some of) one’s talents yet another. The scope
of ontological obligation is thus substantially broader than that of
morality alone.

The obligation to morality, like the obligation to rationality,
accordingly takes root in considerations of ontology—of our condition as
the sorts of rational beings we are (or at any rate see ourselves as
being). If one is in a position to see oneself as in fact rational and
recognizes the value of this rationality, then one must also acknowledge
the obligation to make use of one’s rationality. And if one is a
rational free agent who recognizes and prizes this very fact, then one
ought for that very reason to behave morally by taking the interests of
other such agents into account. For if I am (rationally) to pride myself
on being a rational agent, then I must stand ready to value in other
rational agents what I value in myself—that is, I must deem them *worthy* of respect, care, and so on in
virtue of their status as rational agents. What is at issue is not so
much a matter of *reciprocity *as
one of *rational coherence* with
claims that one does—or, rather, should—stake for oneself. To see myself
in a certain normative light, I must, if rational, stand ready to view
others in the same light. If we indeed are the sort of intelligent
creatures whose worth in our own sight is a matter of prizing something
(reflective self-respect, for example), then this item by virtue of this
very fact assumes the status of something we are bound to recognize as
valuable—as deserving of being valued. In seeing ourselves as *persons*—as free and responsible
rational agents—we thereby rationally bind ourselves to a care for one
another’s interests insofar as those others too are seen as having this
status.<sup>11</sup>

I may *desire* respect (be it
self-respect or the respect of others) for all sorts of reasons, good,
bad, or indifferent. But if I am to *deserve *respect, this has to be so for
good reasons. Respect will certainly not come to me just because I am
me, but only because I have a certain sort of respect-evoking feature
(for example, being a free rational agent) whose possession (by me or,
for that matter, anyone) provides a warrant for respect. And this means
that *all* who have this feature
(all rational agents) merit respect. Our self-worth hinges on the worth
we attach to others like us: we can only have worth by virtue of
possessing worth-engendering features that operate in the same way when
others are at issue. To claim worthiness of respect for myself, I must
concede it to all suitably constituted others as well. The first-person
plural idea of “we” and “us” that projects one’s own identity into a
wider affinity community of rational beings is a crucial basis of our
sense of worth and self-esteem. And so, in degrading other *persons* in thought or in treatment, we
would automatically degrade ourselves, while in doing them honor we
thereby honor ourselves.

When someone acts immorally towards me—cheats me or deceives me or the
like—I am not merely angry and upset because my personal interests have
been impaired, but I am also “righteously indignant.” Not only has the
offender failed to acknowledge me as a person (a fellow rational being
with rights and interests of his own), but they have, by their very act,
marked themselves as someone who, though (to my mind) a congener of mine
as a rational agent, does not give us rational agents their proper due,
thereby degrading the entire group to which I too belong. He has added
insult to injury. And this holds true more generally. One is also
indignant at witnessing someone act immorally towards a third
party—being disturbed in a way that is akin to the annoyance one feels
when some gaffe is committed by a member of one’s own family. One’s own
sense of self and self-worth is mediated by membership in such a group
and this can become compromised by *their* behavior. As rational agents, we
are entitled and committed to be indignant at the wicked actions of our
fellows who do not act as rational agents ought to because our own
self-respect is inextricably bound up with their behavior. They have
“let down the side.”

The upshot of such considerations is that to fail to be moral is to
defeat our own proper purposes and to lose out on our ontological
opportunities. It is only by acknowledging the worth of others— and thus
the appropriateness of a due heed of *their* interests—that we ourselves can
maintain our own claims to self-respect and selfworth. And so, we
realize that we *should* act
morally in each and every case, even where deviations are otherwise
advantageous, because insofar as we do not, we can no longer look upon
ourselves in a certain sort of light—one that is crucial to our own
self-respect in the most fundamental way. Moral agency is an essential
requisite for the proper self-esteem of a rational being. To fail in
this regard is to injure oneself where it does and should hurt the
most—in one’s own sight.

The ontological imperative to capitalize on our opportunities for the
good carries us back to the salient issue of philosophical
anthro-pology—the visualization of what humans can and should be. Being
an “authentic human being” comes down to this: do your utmost to become
the sort of rational and responsible creature that a human being, at
best or most, is capable of being.<sup>12</sup> The moral project of
treating other people as we ourselves would be treated is part and
parcel of this. What we have here is in fact an evaluative metaphysics
of morals.
