# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>Science and Religion</span>

Three points should be clear from the outset:

-   1\. Science does not require God. To answer our scientific questions
    about the world we need not bring theology into it.

-   2\. Science cannot prove God’s existence. We cannot ground theism on
    scientific facts regarding the observable features of the universe.

-   3\. Scientists are nowadays largely atheists. Many or most of them
    manage to live successful lives without any religious commitments.

But once these facts are granted we are at the beginning of the story,
not at its end. For in the end, the salient question is not whether
science involves and requires religious commitment but whether it is
compatible—or even congenial—with religion.

Granted, science as such does not require God. (Neither does
architecture!) But that of course does not mean that scientists do not
need God (or, for that matter, architects). Human life is replete with
important issues that do not belong to science. For science is limited
by being the very thing it is as a functional enterprise of a certain
sort. It is defined by its own characteristic aims and objectives, this
being to explain how things work in the world—how recourse to the laws
of nature can account for the world’s phenomena. But it is (or should
be) clear that humans do not live by knowledge alone. There is, of
course, more to life than that—more than grasping how nature works. We
are creatures not only of understanding but also of doing, not only of
thought but of action.

Science and religion have different jobs to do: they are human
enterprises with aims and objectives that differ. Science deals with the
matter of how things happen in the world—that is, with issues regarding
the explanation, prediction, and control of the world’s occurrences.
Religion, by contrast, addresses normative issues and involves questions
of meaning and value—questions bound up with the master question of what
we ought to do within our lives and how we ought to conduct them.
Regarding the universe that is our home, science takes a <span
style="font-style:italic;">cognitive</span> approach when asking about
the world and its doings. Religion, by contrast, takes an <span
style="font-style:italic;">appreciative</span> approach of affinity,
awe, and wonder. The concern of religion is not from the world as such
but from our personal place within it in relation to what is important
and meaningful for us. Different enterprises with different goals are at
issue: religion cannot do the job of science, nor science that of
religion. Overall, both understanding and affectivity have a role in the
human scheme of things. And so there is no need for the scientist to
scorn religion. For if he is smart he will realize that his lab relates
to the work of the inquiring mind, whereas beyond this work of the
inquiring intellect there yet remains the work of the appreciative
spirit.

Knowledge, after all, is just one component of the constellation of
human goods—one valuable project among others, whose cultivation is part
of the wider framework of human purposes and interests. Human life is a
complicated business, replete with many needs and wants, necessities and
possibilities. The prospect of <span
style="font-style:italic;">understanding </span>and <span
style="font-style:italic;">explaining</span> the world’s ways—of
science, in sum—is only one of these. The quality of our lives turns on
a broad spectrum of personal and communal desiderata, such as physical
well-being, human companionship, environmental congeniality, social
harmoniousness, cultural development, spiritual satisfaction, and so
on—values and insights that science can often help us attain but which
themselves nevertheless fall outside its domain.

The natural scientist deals with the workings of the universe; the fate
of particular individuals, be they protozoa or people, does not concern
him. But the fate of individuals does concern us—and, in particular, the
fate of ourselves as intelligent agents with individual feelings and
experiences, needs and morals, opportunities and aspirations. Science is
based on generalizations that capture the structural relationship of
natural processes. Religion is based on <span
style="font-style:italic;">appreciations</span> and <span
style="font-style:italic;">inspirations</span> (revelations included)—on
personal experiences that enrich reality and our relationship to it by
adding meaning, significance, and value. This “existential” level of our
personal life does not concern science, but nevertheless, our religious
sentiments can and should paint its enlightening picture. It is not as
inquirers but as agents that religion addresses us. Science looks on
us—as it looks on all else—as instances of types. The uniqueness of
particulars eludes our generality-geared science. And yet that is just
exactly what we are: unique particulars. Religion addresses us as
individuals. As far as science is concerned, there is nothing special
about your parents, your siblings, your children. But the affective
dimension of our nature takes a very different line.

An objector may well ask: “But is religious experience and sensibility
not itself a proper subject of scientific study?” Of course science can
study us humans and submit our thoughts and actions to its objectifying
scrutiny. But now the normative dimension of things that is critical to
the actual being of a person will be left by the wayside. For
observation can report, “People think that <span
style="font-style:italic;">X”</span> but of course “People <span
style="font-style:italic;">rightly</span> think that <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span>” is something else. Again, “People
disapprove of <span style="font-style:italic;">Y</span>” can be
perfectly appropriate as a scientifically factual report, but “People
quite properly disapprove of <span style="font-style:italic;">Y</span>”
is something very different. It is one thing to repute and examine
experiences and something quite different to have them. (There is little
about optics that blind people cannot learn—but they nevertheless miss
out on something crucial.) The internalities of reflection and judgments
of human existence are something that science does not touch. The
affective and spiritual dimension that is critically formative to our
status as humans addresses issues that just are not on the scientific
agenda.

Psychological science can say: “Those who have a religious or mystical
experience claim that it gives them contact with a naturetranscendent
sphere of concern.” But of course it is only those who actually have
this experience that will make such a claim. What people make of their
experiences—observational or interpersonal of religions—is up to
them—and not up to the external observers who report about it. A crucial
difference in “point of view” is at issue in the contact between those
who actually experience and those for whom these experiences are mere
“phenomena.” And so, while science is a crucially important realm of
human endeavor, what it will not—and from its own resources cannot—take
a position on is this issue of experimental significance and meaning.
When science considers religion, it does so <span
style="font-style:italic;">ab extra</span> and not from within the
experiential domain of the believer.

And not only appreciation and evaluation, but also <span
style="font-style:italic;">agency</span> becomes a crucial factor with
respect to religious orientation. Science tells us what we <span
style="font-style:italic;">can</span> do—can possibly manage to
realize—given the talents and resources at our disposal. But it does not
and cannot tell us what we <span
style="font-style:italic;">should</span> do. After all, religion is not
a source of factual information about how things stand and work in the
world. We will indeed need science to accomplish that job. But there is
another job that has to be done: the job of life orientation, of guiding
us to a realization of the things that are important, to help us achieve
appropriate goals, values, and interests. And here it is religion that
seeks to direct our efforts and energies in directions that endow our
lives with meaning and rational contentment, to satisfy not just our
wants but our deepest needs, to confirm and consolidate the spiritual
side of our lives, to encourage us to make the most of choices, and to
be able to face the inevitable end of our worldly existence without
regret and shame at the loss of opportunities to contribute to the
greater good of things.

Pierre-Simon marquis de Laplace was right. To do its own proper
explanatory work, science does not need to bring God into it. It is, no
doubt, part of scientific wisdom to discount the idea of God as an
operative agency—a God of the gaps, whose intervention is invoked to
offer a surrogate explanation of the things we do not otherwise
understand. Yet, the proper role of faith is not to provide a rational
explanation of what happens in the universe, but rather it is to
underwrite the idea that such an explanation is always in principle
available—something that science cannot quite manage on its own.

Certainly, religion is not, or should not be, viewed as a substitution
for science; rather it should—by rights—provide a goad and encouragement
to scientific work, motivating the effort to comprehend more fully the
nature of God’s universe and to avail ourselves of the opportunities
that existence upon its stage puts at our disposal.

After all, human agency is in this sense analogous to the divine. When I
act within nature—say by moving this piece of paper about— I proceed by
natural means. Of course it was I that moved the paper. But I did it by
means of hands and arms, of muscles and bone and flesh. To explain <span
style="font-style:italic;">that</span> the paper moved then and there
and <span style="font-style:italic;">how</span> the paper moved then and
there, you need only refer to physical agencies. Only with the ultimate
<span style="font-style:italic;">why</span> that reaches outside the
course of physical events need you ever make mention of me. But when the
questions are about what happens <span
style="font-style:italic;">within</span> physical nature, the answers
are forthcoming in commensurate terms.

“But is a scientist’s dedication to knowledge not paramount to a degree
where he could only accept a religion whose creedal commitments he would
conscientiously consider as truths?” This is doubtless so. But even a
conscientious scientist would do well to distinguish between literal and
figurative truths, factual and normative truths, informative and
orientational truths. After all, the question of what we as individuals
should do with our lives and make of the various opportunities at our
disposal is not a scientific issue. Once we decide this sort of thing,
science can undoubtedly help us to get there. But what our destination
should be is a matter not for science but rather for our commitment to
goals and values. And this sort of thing is simply outside the province
of science, which tells us what the world is like but not what we should
do with our lives.

There will, of course, be overlapping issues where both religion and
science will enter interactively. Religion calls on us to honor human
life by according special treatment to the dead. But science will be
needed to decide the question of whether Smith is in fact now dead so
that these special procedures are to be instituted. And so, while
religion and science are distinct enterprises, they certainly can and
should interact with one another.

A further objection may well arise at this point: “Granted, science and
religion have different roles to play and different questions to
address. But there may well arise some issues in which they come into
conflict, such as the age of the universe, the origin of the world, the
origin of man, and perhaps others.” Now the first thing to note here is
that such seeming disagreements are mostly or even generally the
products of misunderstandings (as is often the case with disagreements
of all sorts). A deeper understanding of just exactly what the religious
claims are and a fuller understanding of the scientific issues will
often or even generally dissolve the conflict as the product of
insufficiently deep understanding, and thereby as more apparent than
real. But even were this not the case, there remain various options for
coming to terms with such disagreements:

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">• Make religion give way to
    science</span>. Reconstrue those scientifically problematic
    religious claims as symbolic, figurative, or metaphorical.

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">• Defer judgment</span>. Realize
    that scientific understanding is a work in progress that has often
    changed its mind about things, and thus await with hopefulness a
    change that will put matters into alignment in the wake of further
    scientific innovation.

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">• Simply combine the two and accept
    the resulting “inconsistency.” </span>Take the line that we live in
    a complex, multifaceted world where science is true from its
    perspective and religion from its, and accept that the two just
    don’t jibe—that different conceptual perspectives can be combined no
    more than different visual ones can. This in effect leaves their
    fusion as a mystery that passes our understanding.

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">• Take recourse in humility</span>.
    Acknowledge that there are many things we just don’t understand and
    that reconciling present, seeming divergences between science and
    religion may just be one of them. (After all, who knows how
    hypnotism or acupuncture work?)

Clearly, the “conflict between science and religion” does not leave one
without options. So, a religion between can hold to the idea that in
cases of conflict some sort of reconsideration will in the end prove
possible.

But now consider the objection: “I want to be a modern, scientific
person, who bases belief on the teachings of science. And science does
not speak for religion: one cannot base theism on scientific facts.”
Well, so be it. But the reality of it is that we stand committed to lots
of things that we cannot base on scientific facts. Are the challenges
and rewards of living based on science? We do—or should— have a special
care for and about our parents, brothers, spouses. Does science
establish them as more lovable and worthy of our affection than other
people? We try to earn the respect of others. Does science teach us that
respect for others—or self-respect for that matter—is a paramount value?
Do we base our values on the teachings of science rather than the
impetus of our natural human feelings? It is simply not through science
that we configure out loyalties, our allegiances, our values. Science
tells us about <span style="font-style:italic;">facts</span>; but their
significance—religious significance included—will and must come from
somewhere else. And it is just here that religious commitment comes into
it.

With regard to the question of the existence of God, the great
mathematician-astronomer Laplace offered the remark, “I had no need for
that hypothesis.” And this is certainly correct. For scientific
questions have to be based on scientific principles. With respect to how
things work in the cosmos, the authority of science will be complete. If
we want to know <span style="font-style:italic;">how it is</span>

world, we had best turn to biological science. But there are also
questions that lie above and beyond the voice of science. And the
question of <span style="font-style:italic;">why it is</span> that the
world is such that there are microbes in it is one of these. For what is
basically at stake here is a value issue, presumably to the general
effect that a world with microbes in it has some significant advantage
over alternatives. Of course someone might say that such a question is
improper and illegitimate—that if an issue makes sense at all then
science can resolve it. But this decidedly radical stance of scientism
(as it is usually called) is a matter not of good sense but of a rather
radical and decidedly problematic ideology.

Science-inspired antireligionists often support their position by
portraying theism as merely the response to a psychological need. Their
reasoning goes essentially like this: “Humans are weak and vulnerable
creatures existing in a difficult and often seemingly hostile world. As
such, they have a mere psychological need for reassurance that the world
is a user-friendly habitat functioning under the auspices of a benign
creative agent or agency.” Now, to speak of something as “a <span
style="font-style:italic;">mere</span> psychological need of man” draws
close to self-contradiction. There is nothing “mere” about such needs.
When a psychological need achieves generality it thereby achieves a sort
of objective validity as well. Given the realities of human development,
it is bound to reflect something that has survived in the operations of
a rational creature, thereby betokening an efficacy that serves to
evidentiate objective validity. Even as our felt need for food would not
be there if our bodies were not sustained by nourishment, so our felt
need for spiritual sustenance could not be there if the world’s
spiritual forces did not sustain it. But there is also another problem
about consigning religions to the limbo of a “mere psychological need.”
For this argument effectively shoots itself in its own foot. Unbelievers
who deploy it are using a weapon that can just as readily be deployed
against them. “Humans are willful and arrogant beings to whom the
thought of an all-observing and stern judge who condemns their wicked
ways is intimidating and daunting. And accordingly, they have a
psychological need to be liberated from this prospect. Their unbelief is
no more than a response to a psychological need.” The upshot is clear:
the argument from psychological need is a two-edged sword that cuts both
ways—alike against theism and atheism. Argumentation from need is a
wash.

“But where is the evidence that speaks for the truth of religion?” This
question has to be approached from the opposite end—from the angle of
the question, “If those religious contentions were indeed true, what
sort of evidence for this fact could we reasonably expect to obtain for
it?” After all, belief in God is the sort of thing that is not a matter
of scientific observation and theory. We do not, cannot, and should not
expect astronauts to come back with reports of angelic encounters in
outer space. (As Nikita Khrushchev once complained, they did not.) It
has to be through inner urgings and the impetus of our hearts that
people are led to religion, not through outer observation. So, if there
were indeed a benevolent God, we would expect that at least in the long
run (and not necessarily the short) and at least in the aggregate (and
not necessarily everywhere) that those who live lives mindful of God’s
suppositions would derive some benefit thereby. And if it is miracles we
demand, then is not our very life itself a constant reminder of the
miracles in nature? Is not this sort of evidence the best and most one
could reasonably expect?

What is it you want? Tablets from the mountain? Voices from the clouds?
Been there, done that; you just missed it, sorry. The best available
evidence for physical theories is experimentation in the physical
laboratory; the best available evidence for medical drugs is by clinical
trials; the best available evidence for religion is by experimentation
and trials in the laboratory of life. Are nonbelievers happier, better,
more contented people than believers? Or is it the other way round? Look
about and see for yourself. Here as elsewhere we must allow the
indications of the evidence to speak.

The reality of it is that science itself is not exempt from “faith in
things unseen.” Nothing guarantees that the phenomena are always and
everywhere as they are within our range of observation. Nothing
guarantees that the laws and regularities that have been in operation in
cosmic history will continue unchanged in the future. Nothing guarantees
that other universes (if such there are—and we presumably cannot get
there from here) have any even remote resemblance of ours. That nature’s
laws are as we think them to be is something we cannot know for sure,
but can only hope.

To be sure, the hope that underpins the inductive proceedings of science
is geared to the objectives of the enterprise—to expecting enhanced
<span style="font-style:italic;">cognitive</span> returns. And it is not
for the sake of enhanced knowledge of world explanative facts that we
turn to religion. But is not the source of the grandeur of scientific
hopefulness equaled by that of religion in relation to the distinctive
character of this particular enterprise as a means to situating oneself
meaningfully within a difficult and complex world?

“But surely scientists are among the smartest people there are, and for
the most part they are not religious.” This objection, too, is
inappropriate. For one thing, religiosity just is not a matter of
smarts—of calculation, of figuring things out by brain power! It is,
rather, a matter of having a reflective perspective on matters of life,
death, and man’s place in reality’s great scheme of things—of having a
certain stance toward the world we live in and in which reactions like
awe and wonder are significant and responses like worshipful humility
figure significantly.

The idea that it is inappropriate for a scientist to be religious
because the majority of scientists are not theists is quite misguided.
After all, scientists themselves do not proceed in this manner. It is
not part of the scientific mentality to “go with the flow” and accept
what the majority thinks. Scientists try to figure things out for
themselves as best they can.

Moreover, the reality of it is that while the majority of scientists are
(probably) atheists, a very sizable minority are theists of one sort or
another. Certainly this has been so traditionally from Galileo to Newton
to Maxwell to Einstein. But even today many fine scientists are theists,
and in some fields—cosmological physics in particular— they often even
put their theism in touch with their scientific work.

“But the idea of an intelligent creator just doesn’t make sense. After
all, the universe has developed by some sort of cosmic evolution. And
any sort of evolutionary product is inefficient, slow, and wasteful.
Surely an intelligent creator would do better.” This sort of objection
is predicated on the idea that an intelligent creator would not opt for
getting physical reality under way by a process of cosmic evolution
proceeding developmentally from some un-state inaugurated in a big
bang-like initiation event. The objector seems to think it would only be
fitting to the divine dignity to inaugurate a universe by zapping it
into existence in medias res, as a development-dispensing concern. It
is, however, not readily apparent why this would be preferable. And it
poses some distinctive problems of its own—for example, why the universe
should not have been created five minutes ago completely fitted out with
geological traces, human memories, and so on.

As noted before, it would be a profound error to oppose evolution to
intelligent design—to see these two as somehow conflicting and
incompatible. For natural selection—the survival of forms better able to
realize self-replication in the face of challenges and overcome the
difficulties posed by the world’s vicissitudes—affords an effective
means to intelligent resolutions.

“But in the light of such utilitarian considerations religion is perhaps
simply a matter of the evolution<span
style="font-style:italic;">-</span>engendered impetus to believe,

leaving truth altogether by the wayside, and thereby bereft of rational
legitimacy.” Yet would this conclusion really follow? Is conceding that
a certain instinct has evolution’s “Good Housekeeping Seal of Approval”
not already to concede to it a solid basis in fact? To say that
religious belief is “no more” than the product of an evolutionary
instinct is to have a strange idea about what can be considered “no
more.” Indeed, to say that a belief instinct is founded in evolution is
automatically to concede to it a significant evidential basis in the
world’s operative realities. Evolution is not a process that favors the
misguided, deceitful, and false.

As Darwin himself already noted in his <span
style="font-style:italic;">Descent of Man</span>, “belief in
all-pervading spiritual agencies seems to be universal.” And on the
basis of evolutionary principles it is difficult to imagine that this
would be so if such a belief were not somehow survival conducive.
Clearly, belief in an ultimately benign cosmos is likely to benefit
agents of finite intelligence who must constantly act in the expectation
that things will turn out well. And this is going to require the
suitable backing of fact. Are not things that taste good generally
edible and things that taste bad not generally harmful? Is not the
tendency to believe that things are as our experience indicates them to
be generally correct as well as essential to the conduct of life? Does
evolution itself not proceed via a systemic coordination of utility and
correctness? Evolutionary grounding surely constitutes a positive
credential rather than a refutation. After all, evolution will not back
losers. For belief-motivated agents, cognitive adequacy is bound to be
survival conducive. Evolution will not—cannot—imprint us with tendencies
that are systematically counterproductive—even optical illusions take
root in processes that work to our advantage. Its motto is: survival of
the most advantageous. And which is more advantageous for us: truth or
falsehood? Will it be advantageous for us to think that hostiles are
friends and friends unfriendly, that poisons nourish and nourishments
poison, that small objects are large and large ones small? There may be
forces at work in the universe that engender tendencies to systematic
error, but evolution is not one of them.

“But what of the untold suffering that has been—and is—im-posed on
mankind in the name of religion?” All one can say here is that
condemnation by association is not sensible—any more than guilt by
association is. Pretty much anything useful in human affairs has the
potential of abuse as well. The knife that helps to feed us can murder
as well. The medicine that can cure can also poison. The police that
sustain our peace can be an instrument of oppression. The religions that
should by rights sustain brotherhood can make for enmity. All this is
true and regrettable. But there is nothing unique or different here—we
confront a fact of life that prevails throughout the realm of human
affairs. If we refrain from resorting to those things that admit of
abuse, then there is little we would be able to accomplish in this life.

Moreover, people in glass houses should not throw stones. When
complaining of harm done in the name of religion, one should not
entirely overlook harm done under the auspices of science. Those
greatest of all physics experiments, atomic bombs, have killed far more
people than were ever lynched. The medical experimentation of the Nazi
extermination camps killed more people than the Spanish Inquisition. The
complex machinery of informed consent in matters of pharmacology and
medicine represent so many ventures in closing barn doors after fled
horses.

“But what of all the wicked and even crazy things that people have
done—and are doing—in the name of religion?” Here again condemnation by
association does not work. Because some people pursue a project in evil
ways does not mean that everyone need do so. The situation is akin to
the injunction, “Find yourself a profession.” Clearly, the existence of
wickedness in the group should not deter one from being a doctor, baker,
or candlestick maker. One need not be estranged from religion by the
fact that some practitioners are nasty any more than an accountant or
professor need be. And of course the same thing goes for scientists as
well. The proverbial “mad scientist” does not annihilate the value of
the whole venture. To reject being affiliated to the wicked is to resign
from the human race.

“But so far it has only been argued that a scientifically-minded person
can be religious: that various obstacles and objections can be removed.
But it is one thing to hold that something can be done, and something
else to hold that it should be done. So why should a modern
scientifically-minded person adopt a religion?” The answer is that one
should only do so if one wants to: only if there is urging in one’s
inner nature that impels one in this direction. But of course, human
nature being what it is, this is something that is likely to be the
case—at least potentially—with all of us. For when we consider our place
in the world’s vast scheme of things, all of us are liable to that sense
of awe and wonder that lies at the basis of religiosity and to yearn for
a reassurance of our worth and dignity that only faith (and not
knowledge) can provide for us. Man—<span style="font-style:italic;">Homo
sapiens</span>— is a rational animal. And what lifts us above the level
of animality is the process through which we come to knowledge—and
preeminently scientific knowledge, which includes us regarding the
limits and limitations that call for a confirmation of meaning and value
to which religious faith alone can adequately respond.

“But can’t I lead an ethically good and evaluatively fruitful life
without religion?” Certainly you can! Many people manage to do so. But
it’s a bit harder. It’s like asking, “Can’t I be a good violin player
without lots of practice?” or “Can’t I be a fluent Mandarin speaker if I
only start learning at thirty?” It can be done. Some very fortunate
people can pull it off. But it is not easy—and scarcely practicable for
most of us.

“But all these considerations are vague and directionally inconclusive.
They speak for having a religion but do not resolve the issue of which
one.” True enough. So what is one to make of the plurality of religions?
The reality of different religions is a fact of life. Throughout the
history of human civilization, different forms of religious commitment
have coexisted on our planet. And it is perfectly clear why this should
be so. For religions at once reflect and actualize how people relate to
transcendent or “ultimate” realities that create and shape the world we
live in and our destiny within it. But of course here, as elsewhere, how
people relate to things is determined by their issue-relevant
experience. And since people differently situated in variant historical
and cultural contexts have different courses of experience, there are
bound to be different religions. After all, some religions are simply
unavailable to people for historical reasons. The ancient Greeks of
Homer’s day could not have become Muslims or Christians. And cultural
context will clearly be another limiting factor. Some religions are
inaccessible to people because the whole issue of their experience
points them in altogether different directions. The Englishmen of the
era of Pusey and Newman could be Nonconformist or Anglican—or Roman
Catholic. They could not really have joined the Shinto faith, let alone
that of the Mayans or the Aztecs. Cultural contexts limit the range of
available options. And for particular individuals even one’s personal
and idiosyncratic temperament will limit the alternatives that are
realistically available to people. So it seems as though the issue of
religious pluralism is going to have to be personalistically
relativized. There being many religions, the question—seemingly—will be,
“Which one of these various possibilities is going to be right for me—or
for <span style="font-style:italic;">X</span>?” For the individual,
there is going to be a limit to the range of possibilities, what William
James characterized as “live options.” In his characteristically vivid
prose he wrote:

Ought it, indeed, to be assumed that the lives of all men should show
identical religious elements? In other words, is the existence of so
many religious types and sects and creeds regrettable? To these
questions I answer “No” emphatically. And my reason is that I do not see
how it is possible that creatures in such different positions and with
such different powers as human individuals are, should have exactly the
same functions and the same duties. No two of us have identical
difficulties, nor should we be expected to work out identical solutions.
Each, from his peculiar angle of observation, takes in a certain sphere
of fact and trouble, which each must deal with in a unique manner . . .
If an Emerson were forced to be a Wesley, or a Moody forced to be a
Whitman, the total human consciousness of the divine would
suffer.<sup>1</sup>

So, while there indeed are various religions, the reality of it is that
the range of religions that are realistically available to a given
individual is drastically curtailed. In adopting a religion, as in
adopting a profession or selecting a place to live, you have to make up
your own mind on the basis of the best information you have the time and
energy to collect. And the range is confined by potent constraints and
depends upon the person’s culture, environment, familial situation,
personal disposition, and the like, to an extent that often as not
narrows the range of alternatives down to one. The question, “What
religion is right for me?” is for most of us analogous to that of
choosing a language. One’s cultural context does the job for most of us.
Of course there is some modest degree of choice—we can with great effort
tear ourselves loose to go elsewhere. But only if you do so as a small
child will the result ever be completely natural. The individual who
shifts to another language as an adult will never speak it entirely as a
native. And those who are able to make even a halfway successful job of
it are comparatively few and far between.

“But is not this sort of position that of an indifferentist relativism
(‘it’s all just a matter of taste and inclination—there is no rhyme or
reason to it.’)?” No, it certainly is not. Rather, it is that of a
reasoned contextualism based on what is appropriate for people given the
circumstances of their particular situation. And contexts can grow—
especially under the impetus of expanding experience, personal and
vicarious. And there is, of course, no reason why these circumstances
should not include a critical scrutiny of the alternatives. For
religions are not created equal. An intelligent and enterprising person
should not hesitate to explore the options: a religion is not a gift
horse into whose mouth one should not look critically.

But what sense can one make of the question, “Is there one single,
uniquely best and appropriate religion?” What sort of cogent case could
the antipluralist advocate of “one uniquely true religion” possibly have
in view?

To all visible intents and purposes this question comes down to: “Is
there one religion which any rational person would accept given the
opportunity—that is, would freely choose in the light of full
information about it and its alternatives?” We are, to all appearance,
driven back to Kant’s question about “religion within the limits of
reason alone.”

On this basis someone could well protest: “Does not this very approach
seriously prejudice matters by prejudging a very fundamental issue? For
does it not put reason in the driver’s seat by putting it in the role of
the arbiter of religion? And does it thus not ride roughshod over
Pascal’s insistence that some human fundamentals are properly matters of
the mind and others of the heart?”

But this objection simply has to be put aside as contextually
inappropriate. If that question about the one true and optimal religion
is indeed meaningful, then there will and must be a pre-commitment
neutral, rationally cogent answer to it that is being demanded. We have
no sensible alternative here. What sort of answer to our question could
we want that is not reasonable? For sure, it would make no sense to
assess the merit of religions on their own telling. Some
commitment-neutral standpoint is needed. And what better place is there
to go than the realm of reason?

So, what is it that our rationality has to say on the matter? If it is
our intent and purpose to proceed objectively and appraise religions on
a basis that involves no prior substantive religious commitments, then
we have no real alternative but to proceed functionally—to go back to
square one and begin with the question of the aims and purposes that
religions serve as modes of human belief and practice. And so there is
really only one path before us. It is—prepare for a shock!—the way of
pragmatism, that is, of a functionally oriented inquiry into the
question of what religion optimally accomplishes, the aims and purposes
for which religions are instituted as operative practices within human
communities. For if what lies before us is the question of religious
optimality—of which of those multiple religions is to qualify as
best—then the question of “How for the best?” simply cannot be avoided.
At this stage, we have no realistic alternative but to view religions in
a purposive light and inquire into the aims and purposes of the
enterprise, asking: “Why is it that people should undertake a religious
commitment at all? What sensible human purpose is realized by making a
religious commitment a significant part of one’s life? What’s in it for
us—to put it crassly?” In approaching religion from such a practicalist
point of view—inquiring into the human aims and objectives that
adherence to a religion can and should facilitate—one is going to come
up with a list such as this:

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">•</span> Providing a framework for
    understanding the world and our personal place within it that
    energizes what Abraham Lincoln called, “the better angels of our
    nature.”

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">•</span> Providing a focus for the
    sense of awe, wonder, and worship as we puny creatures confront a
    natural world of vast extent and power, giving a sense of comfort in
    the face of the vast forces beyond our control. And possibilizing
    powerful interaction with the agency that governs the fate of all
    they hold dear.

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">•</span> Providing an evaluative
    appreciation of the universe and giving an impetus to human
    productivity and creativity within it. Enabling a frail and
    vulnerable creature to feel “at home” in the universe and
    strengthening the sense of opportunity to have a “meaningful life.”

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">•</span> Providing people with a
    perspective that gives their lives a meaningful position in the
    universe’s grand scheme of things, providing them a worldview
    supportive of human aspirations and diminishing any sense of
    futility, alienation, and dehumanization.

-   <span style="font-style:italic;">•</span> Providing a sense of
    social solidarity with our fellows and an appreciation of the worth
    and dignity of human potential in a way that strengthens the fabric
    of mutual concern, care, and respect for one another, resulting in a
    diminishing of man’s inhumanity to man.

Then too, there is the role of religion in easing people’s anguish and
anxiety in the face of life’s frustrations and difficulties. The
spiritual impact of “lifting people’s spirits” is a vibrant reality. In
augmenting the quality of their lives and enhancing their performance in
meeting life’s challenges, religion can and should make a positive
contribution to the quality of life.

On this basis, it emerges that a complex fabric of potential
psychological, social, and cognitive benefits are at issue with a
person’s commitment to a religion. In other words, there is—or can be—
something in it for us. And a chain of natural connections links all of
these by a line that runs from cosmic congeniality to individual
self-worth, to the worth of our peers, to human solidarity at large.
More than any other ideological posture, religious faith makes manifest
“the power of positive thinking.” Without religion, in sum, it is
somewhere between difficult and impossible to realize various salient
positivities that are conducive, and perhaps even to some extent
indispensable, to human flourishing.

We confront the question of compassion, where to all appearances the
best we can then do is to apply the standard of humanity itself and ask:
“What form of religion most effectively succeeds in calling forth the
best in people and most supportively energizes them into a way of life
that deserves our admiration and respect?” Within the narrow confines
that are now upon us, this seems to be the best and most one can do to
affect an “objective” comparison. For without serious commitment to the
cultivation of the great goods, whose pursuit is an opportunity afforded
us by human existence—goodness, happiness, virtue, beauty, knowledge—a
religion builds on sandy ground. Even without question-begging
precommitments, we can look at religions not only subjectively, in terms
of their capacity to speak to us personally, but more impersonally, in
terms of their capacity to address larger issues that confront all of us
relative to the challenges of creating an intellectually and emotionally
satisfying life within the circumstances of a complex and often
difficult world. Where entry into a community of faith is concerned, we
humans, as rational beings, are not just entitled but effectively
obligated to look for a religion that is intellectually satisfying,
personally congenial, and socially benign. A religion whose theologians
avoid the difficult questions, whose preachers do not engage the
sympathy of our hearts, and whose practitioners are not energized to
exert effort for the general good of mankind and the alleviation of
suffering is surely thereby one unworthy of enlisting the allegiance of
sensible and sensitive people.

Admittedly, there is little doubt that, judged by the aforementioned
standards, the record of all of the world’s major religions is rather
spotty. Unquestionably, our religions—like all other human enterprises
and mutilations—will reflect the frailties and imperfections of our
species by the fact of its being a structure built up of and by what
Kant called the crocked timber of humanity. But the issue is not one of
perfection. It is a matter of the seriousness of effort and the
comparative extent of success.

To be sure, someone who becomes religious only from considerations of
“What’s in it for me” is not an authentically religious person at all.
But the crux is that religious commitment is <span
style="font-style:italic;">transformative</span>. No matter how you
enter—even if for reasons of human solidarity, let alone for crass and
self-advantaging motives—you will not manage to remain there.
Commitment, no matter how modest at first, will undergo a natural
process of growth.<sup>2</sup>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">14</span>
