# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>Pragmatism and Practical Rationality</span>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Functionalistic Pragmatism</span>

Pragmatism is a philosophical position that puts practice at center
stage and sees efficacy in practical activities as the prime goals of
human endeavor. But there are two markedly different ways of working out
this sort of a program.

One way of implementing the leading idea of pragmatism is to see theory
and theorizing as being incidental and secondary in impor-tance—a
“merely intellectual” concern that has a less significant role in human
affairs than do matters of action and praxis. This version of the
position might be characterized as <span
style="font-style:italic;">practicalism</span>.

However, a quite different version of pragmatism sees theory as
subordinate to praxis not in <span
style="font-style:italic;">importance</span> but rather in <span
style="font-style:italic;">fundamental-ity</span>. This approach does
not relegate theory to a secondary status in point of interest or
importance. On the contrary, it regards theory as something crucial and
critically important but then takes success in matters of practical
implementation as the adequacy criterion of successful theorizing. This
criteriological version of the theory might be designated as <span
style="font-style:italic;">functionalism</span>.

Such a functionalistic version of pragmatism regards effective praxis as
the arbiter of appropriate theorizing. It takes considerations of
purposive effectiveness to provide the standard for the adequacy of the
operative principles of human endeavor—alike in theoretical and
practical matters. Effective implementation is its pervasive standard of
adequacy.

Pragmatism’s historic concern has always been not with the descriptive
characteristics of things but with their normative appropriateness. And
here its logical starting point is the uncontroversial idea that the
natural and sensible standard of approval for something that is in any
procedural—anything that has an aspect that is methodological,
procedural, or instrumental—lies in the question of its successful
application. Any process or procedure that has a teleol-ogy—that is, an
instrumentality for the realization of certain pur-poses—will
automatically be subject to an evaluation standard that looks to its
efficacy. For whenever something is in any way purposively oriented to
the realization of certain ends, the natural question for its evaluation
in this regard is that of its serviceability in effective end
realization.

After all, man is a purposive animal. Virtually everything that we do
has a purpose to it. Even play, idleness, and tomfoolery have a
purpose—to divert, to provide rest and recreation, to kill time.

And certainly our larger projects in the realm of human endeavor are
purposive:

Inquiry—to resolve doubt and to guide action.

Ethics—to encourage modes of conduct in human interactions that canalize
them into a generally satisfactory and beneficial form.

Law—to establish and enforce rules of conduct.

Education—to acculturate the younger generation so as to enhance the
prospect that young people will find their way to personally satisfying
and communally beneficial lifestyles.

Art—to create objects or object types, exposure to which engenders
personally rewarding and enlightening experiences.

On this basis, a functionalistic pragmatism can encompass the entire
range of human concern. It is not (and should not be) a mainly
materialistic doctrine concerned only with crass payoffs. Rather, it is
a multipurpose resource. For a pragmatic approach to validation can of
course be implemented in <span style="font-style:italic;">any</span>
purposive setting. Given any aim or objective whatever, we can always
provide a correlative validation in terms of the effectiveness and
efficiency of its realization. But a really thorough pragmatism must dig
yet more deeply. It cannot simply take purposes as given—as gift horses
into whose mouths we must not look. For purpose adoption too has to be
viewed in a pragmatic perspective as an act or activity of sorts that
itself stands in need of legitimation. Accordingly, a sensible
pragmatism also requires an <span style="font-style:italic;">axiology of
purposes</span>, a normative methodology for assessing the
appropriateness of the purposes we espouse for creatures situated as we
are in the world’s scheme of things.

We humans live subject to a manifold of processes: physical, chemical,
biological, social, economic, and so on. Each processual realm imposes
various purposes upon us, subjecting us to needs, requirements, and
desiderata of various sorts. The meeting of these purposes involves us
in a wide variety of projects, each with its own manifold of
purpose-accommodating processes. We are thus committed to such projects
as the pursuit of nourishment, of physical security, of comfort, of
education, of sociability, of rest and recreation, each designed to meet
our requirements for food, shelter, clothing, knowledge, companionship,
realization, and equipment with its own complex of needs and desiderata.
And throughout this manifold we encounter the same rationale of end
realization with its inherent involvement with issues of effectiveness
and efficiency. Pragmatism’s concern for functional efficiency, for
success in the realization of ends and purposes, is an inescapable
formative factor as an intelligent being makes its way in the world by
means of the instrumentality of rational agency. In such a purposive
setting, the pragmatic approach with its concern for functional efficacy
is a critical aspect of rationality itself.

The fact of it is that human beings not only have wants, wishes, and
desires, they have needs as well. Individually, we need nourishment,
physical security, and congenial interaction if our physical and our
psychological well-being is to be achieved and maintained. Collectively,
we require social arrangements that maximize the opportunities for
mutual aid and minimize those for mutual harm. This aspect of the
practical scheme of things is built into our very condition as the sorts
of creatures we are.

Some aims and purposes are optional—we choose them freely. But others
are mandatory—built into the very fabric of our existence within nature
as members of our species. These nonoptional aims and purposes will
obviously have to play a pivotal role in a functionalistic pragmatism
built on that paramount demand of reason: efficacy in goal attainment.

And this endows functionalistic pragmatism with a second dimension of
objectivity. On the one hand, it is perfectly objective and nowise a
matter of preference what sorts of means are effective in the
realization of specified objectives. And on the other hand, it is
analogously perfectly objective and nowise a matter of preference that
humans have certain needs—certain requirements that must be satisfied if
they are to exist, perdure, and function effectively as the sorts of
creatures that they have evolved into on the world’s stage.

By virtue of their very nature as purposive instrumentalities, the
values that reflect our needs can and generally do fall within the
domain of reason. For values are functional objects that have a natural
teleology themselves, namely that of helping us to lead lives that are
personally satisfying (meet our individual needs) and communally
productive (facilitate the realizations of constructive goals to the
community at large). This state of things has far-reaching implications
because it indicates that our assessment of values themselves can and
should be ultimately pragmatic. Our evaluations are appropriate only
insofar as their adoption and cultivation are efficiently and
effectively conducive to the realization of human interests—the
rationally appropriate ends, personal and communal—that root us in our
place in the scheme of things.

Accordingly, a pragmatism that is consistent, coherent, and
selfsustaining will not just proceed pragmatically with respect to
achieving unevaluated ends and purposes. It must also apply its
pragmatic perspective to the issue of validating ends and purposes
themselves in terms of their capacity to facilitate the realization of
those considerations, which for us humans are simply “facts of life.”

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Evaluative Rationality and Appropriate
Ends</span>

But how far can this line of thought carry us? Pragmatism’s standard of
adequacy pivots on procedural efficacy. But can this seemingly crass
prioritization of utility possibly provide grounds for even
acknowledging the significance in human affairs of higher, less crassly
utilitarian sorts of values? Can it ever reach beyond the sphere of the
bare basic necessities of life?

To resolve this question we must go back to basics. Pragmatism pivots
the validation of our instrumentalities of thought and action on their
effectiveness in goal realization. But goals are certainly not created
equal; they clearly have different degrees of merit. There are
impersonally valid modes of evaluation by which goals themselves can be
assessed, so that the rational evaluation that pragmatism envisions can
be implemented in an objectively cogent way. The capacity for
intelligent choice makes us humans into rational agents, but it is only
through our having appropriate values that the prospect of intelligent
choice becomes open for us. The human situation being what it is,
existential circumstances spread a vast range of possibilities out
before us. At many junctures, life confronts us with alternative
directions in which to proceed. And only through the evaluation of such
alternatives can we affect a sensible (rationally appropriate and
acceptable) choice among them. On this basis, values are
instrumentalities that serve to possibilize and facilitate the
satisfactory conduct of life. And moreover, a commitment to values not
only aids in making our lives as intelligent agents possible, they also
make it meaningful. For the life of the human individual is brief: here
today, gone tomorrow. It is through our commitment to values that we can
reach out beyond the restrictive limits of the space and time available
to us as individuals in this world, moving toward the realization of
something larger and more significant.

To be sure, it is often said that values are just matters of taste—of
mere personal predilection. If this were indeed the case, then any and
all claims to value objectivity would at once become untenable. But is
it so? Evaluation certainly is not—and should not be—a matter of taste.
People who are not prepared to back an option of <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span> over <span
style="font-style:italic;">Y </span>by <span
style="font-style:italic;">cogent reasons</span> of some sort are merely
evincing a preference and not actually making any sort of meaningful
evaluation at all. Tastes, as usually understood, represent unreasoned
preferences and purely subjective predilections. There is consequently
no disputing about them: <span style="font-style:italic;">de gustibus
non disputandum est.</span> If I prefer <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span> to <span
style="font-style:italic;">Y,</span> then that’s that. But values are
something quite different. They are by nature functional
instrumentalities since their mission is to canalize our action via our
rational choices. They have objective impact, relating not to what we
<span style="font-style:italic;">do prefer</span> but to what we <span
style="font-style:italic;">can and should appropriately deem
preferable</span>—that is, worthy of preference. And preference
worthiness is something that is always discussible, something that needs
to be reasoned about. To be in a position to maintain—in a manner that
is sensible and reasonable—that <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span> is preferable to <span
style="font-style:italic;">Y,</span> one must be in a position to back
one’s claim up with some sort of rationale. And the inherent rationality
of our need-embedded evaluations carries them outside the range of mere
matters of taste.

Moreover, our values themselves are not—and should not be— arbitrary and
haphazard. For in the final analysis, they pivot not on mere wants and
the vagaries of arbitrary choice in fortuitous preference but on our
best interests and real needs—on what is necessary or advantageous to a
person’s well-being. We humans, being the sorts of creatures we are,
have need-based interests that as such should (insofar as we are
rational) control the validation of our wants and preferences.
Validating an evaluation thus is not and cannot be a matter of mere
subjectivity. The projects into which our nature impels us—the medical
project, say, or the alimentary, or the cogni-tive—obviously carry a
whole host of value commitments in their wake. Just here is where the
pragmatic impetus comes into play. For once a goal is given, then other
connected goals can come to be validated with reference to it. It is
thus a grave mistake to think that one cannot reason about values on the
supposed ground that values are simply a matter of taste and thus beyond
the reach of reason because “there’s no reasoning about tastes.” Such a
position founders on the distinction between mere wants and real needs.
For the fact is that values are valid just exactly to the extent they
serve to implement and satisfy our needs and our correlatively
appropriate interests. (The seeming harshness of this view is mitigated
by the circumstance that for us humans the satisfaction of some of our
mere wants—seen not in specific but in statistical generality—is itself
a need.)

In particular, values that impede the realization of a person’s best
interests are clearly inappropriate. A priority scheme that sets mere
wants above real needs or sets important objectives aside to avert
trivial inconveniences is thereby deeply flawed from the rational point
of view.<sup>1</sup> And even as with needs and interests in general, so
even great values may well have to yield to the yet greater. (Some
things are rightly dearer to sensible people than life itself.)

And, to reemphasize, the rationality of ends inheres in the simple fact
that we humans have various valid <span
style="font-style:italic;">needs</span>—that we require not only
nourishment and protection against the elements for the maintenance of
health, but also information (“cognitive orientation”), affection,
freedom of action, and much else besides. Without such varied goods we
cannot thrive as fulfilled human beings. The person who does not give
these manifold desiderata their due—who may even set out to frustrate
their realization—is clearly not being rational. For in the end,
evaluation lies at the very heart and core of rationality. For
rationality is a matter of best serving our overall interests. The
person who expends more effort in the pursuit of ends than they are
worth is not just being wasteful but foolish, which is to say
irrational. The rationality of our actions hinges critically on both the
appropriateness of our ends <span style="font-style:italic;">and</span>
the suitability of the means by which we pursue their cultivation. Both
of these components—the <span style="font-style:italic;">cogently
cognitive</span> (“<span style="font-style:italic;">intelligent</span>
pursuit”) and the <span style="font-style:italic;">normatively purposive
</span>(“<span style="font-style:italic;">appropriate</span> ends”)—are
alike essential to full-fledged rationality.

To be sure, the springs of human agency are diverse. We frequently act
not for <span style="font-style:italic;">reasons</span> alone but from
“mere motives”—out of anxiety, cupidity, habit, impulse. In such cases,
we also have ends and purposes in view—but generally not <span
style="font-style:italic;">appropriate</span> ones. If rationality were
merely a matter of unevaluated goals and purposes as such—if it were to
consist simply in the “technical rationality” of goal-efficient
action—then the established line between the rational and the irrational
would have to be redrawn in a very different place, and its linkage with
what is intelligent and well-advised would be severed. But where there
is no <span style="font-style:italic;">appropriate</span> and thus no
meaningful end, rational agency ceases. (There may, of course, still be
room for goal-directed action, but without goals it is bound to be
problematic from the rational point of view.) And of course while all
people are (hopefully) <span style="font-style:italic;">capable</span>
of reason, no well-informed person thinks they invariably—or even
generally—exercise this capacity.

But the fact remains that the rationality of ends is an indispensable
component of rationality at large for two principal reasons. Rationally
valued ends must be evaluatively appropriate ones: if we adopt
inappropriate ends we are not being rational, no matter how efficiently
and effectively we pursue them. The sensible attunement of means to ends
that is characteristic of rationality calls for an appropriate balancing
of costs and benefits in our choice among alternative ways of resolving
our cognitive, practical, and evaluative problems. Reason accordingly
demands determination of the true value of things. Even as cognitive
reason requires that in determining what we are to accept we should
assess the evidential grounds for theses at their true worth, so
evaluative reason requires us to appraise the values of our practical
options at their true worth in determining what we are to choose or
prefer. And this calls for an appropriate cost-benefit analysis. Values
must be managed as an overall “economy” in a rational way to achieve
overall harmonization and optimization. Economic rationality is not the
only sort of rationality there is, but it is an important aspect of
overall rationality. Someone who rejects such economic
considerations—who, in the absence of any envisioned compensating
advantages, deliberately purchases benefits for millions he recognizes
as being worth only a few pen-nies—is simply not rational. It is just as
irrational to let one’s efforts in the pursuit of chosen objectives
incur costs that outrun their true worth as it is to let one’s beliefs
run afoul of the evidence. And the evaluative rationality at issue here
is the pragmatic one of the efficient pursuit of appropriate
ends.<sup>2</sup>

After all, there is nothing automatically appropriate—let alone
sa-cred—about our own ends, objectives, and preferences as such. We can
be every bit as irrational and stupid with the adoption of ends as with
any other choice. Apparent interests are not automatically real, getting
what one wants is not necessarily to one’s benefit, and goals are not
rendered valid by their mere adoption. People’s ends can be
self-destructive, self-defeating impediments to the realization of their
true needs. For rationality, the crucial question is that of the true
value of the item at issue. What counts for rational validity is not
preference but preferability—not what people do want, but what they
<span style="font-style:italic;">ought</span> to want; not what <span
style="font-style:italic;">people</span> actually want, but what <span
style="font-style:italic;">sensible </span>or <span
style="font-style:italic;">right-thinking</span> people would want under
the circumstances. The normative aspect is ineliminable here.
Rationality calls for objective judgment—for an assessment of
preferability, rather than for a mere expression of preference, no
questions asked. The rationality of ends, their rational appropriateness
and legitimacy, is accordingly a crucial aspect of rationality. More is
at issue with rationality than a matter of strict instrumentality—mere
effectiveness in the pursuit of ends no matter how inappropriate they
may be. When we impute to our ends a weight and value they do not in
fact have, we pursue mere will-o’-the-wisps. There is an indissoluble
connection between the true value of something (its being good or right
or useful) and its being rational to choose or prefer this thing. Being
desired does not automatically make something desirable, nor being
valued valuable. The pivot is how matters <span
style="font-style:italic;">ought</span> to be—a region where needs come
to dominate over wants.

And so, the crucial question for evaluative rationality is not that of
what we prefer, but that of what is in our best interests—not simply
what we may happen to desire, but what is good for us in the sense of
fostering the realization of our needs. The pursuit of what we want is
rational only in so far as we have <span
style="font-style:italic;">sound</span> reasons for deeming this to be
deserving of want. The question whether what we prefer is preferable, in
the sense of <span style="font-style:italic;">deserving</span> this
preference, is always relevant. For it is not just beliefs that can be
stupid, ill-advised, and inappropri-ate—that is to say, <span
style="font-style:italic;">irrational</span>—but ends as well.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">The Impetus of Interests</span>

Contentions like “Smith is selfish, inconsiderate, and boorish”
accordingly do not lie outside the sphere of rational inquiry—nor for
that matter do contentions like “Behavior that is
selfish/inconsider-ate/boorish is against the best interest of people.”
The issue of <span style="font-style:italic;">appropriate</span> action
in the circumstances in which we find ourselves is pivotal for
rationality. Be it in matters of belief, action, or evaluation, we
want—that is to say, often do and always <span
style="font-style:italic;">should</span> want—to do the best we can. One
cannot be rational without due care for the desirability of what one
desires—the issue of its alignment with our <span
style="font-style:italic;">real</span>, as distinguished from our <span
style="font-style:italic;">putative</span>, or merely seeming interests.

But just what is it that is in a person’s real or best interests?
Partly, this is indeed a matter of meeting the needs that people
universally have in common—health, satisfactory functioning of body and
mind, adequate resources, human companionship and affection, and so
on.<sup>3</sup> Partly, it is a matter of the particular role one plays:
cooperative children are in the interests of a parent, customer loyalty
in those of a shopkeeper. Partly, it is a matter of what one simply
happens to want. (If John loves Mary, then engaging Mary’s attention and
affections are in John’s interests—some sorts of things are in a
person’s interests simply because he takes an interest in them.) But
these want-related interests are valid only by virtue of their relation
to universal interests. Mary’s approbation is in John’s interest only
because having the approbation of someone we love is <span
style="font-style:italic;">always</span> in <span
style="font-style:italic;">anyone’s</span> interest. Any valid <span
style="font-style:italic;">specific</span> interest must fall within the
validating scope of an appropriate <span
style="font-style:italic;">universal</span> covering principle of
interest legitimation. (The development of my stamp collection is in my
interest only because it is part of a hobby that constitutes an
avocation for me and securing adequate relaxation and diversion from the
stresses and annoyances of one’s daily cares is something that is in
<span style="font-style:italic;">anyone’s</span> interests.)

But what of those “mere whims and fancies”? If I have a craving for
eating crabgrass, then is my doing so not a perfectly appropriate
“interest” of mine? Yes, it is. But only because it is covered by
perfectly cogent universal interest, namely that of “Doing what I feel
like doing in circumstances where neither injury to me nor harm to
others is involved.” A specific (concrete, particular) interest of a
person is valid as such only if it can be subordinated to a universal
interest by way of having a basis in people’s legitimate needs. It is
these higher-level principles that are the controlling factors from the
standpoint of reason. Only through coming under the aegis of those
larger universal needs can our idiosyncratic want come to be validated.

Like various beliefs, various evaluations are palpably
crazy.<sup>4</sup> Reason, after all, is not just a matter of the
compatibility or consistency of pre-given commitments but of the warrant
that there is for undertaking certain commitments in the first place. An
<span style="font-style:italic;">evaluative</span> rationality that
informs us that certain preferences are absurd—preferences that wantonly
violate our nature, impair our being, or diminish our
opportunities—fortunately lies within the human repertoire.

The ancient Greek thinker, Xenophanes of Colophon, was doubtless right.
Even as different creatures may well have different gods, so they might
well have different goods. But no matter. <span
style="font-style:italic;">For us humans </span>the perfectly
appropriate sort of good is <span style="font-style:italic;">our</span>
sort of good—the human good inherent in the manner of our emplacement
within the world’s scheme of things. In this regard, Aristotle did
indeed get to the heart of the matter. For us, the human good is indeed
an adequate foundation for substantive, practical rationality. Given
that we are what we are, it is this that is decisive for us. We have to
go on from where we are. It is in <span
style="font-style:italic;">this</span> sense alone that there is no
deliberation about ends. The universally appropriate ends at issue in
our human condition are not somehow freely <span
style="font-style:italic;">chosen</span> by us; they are fixed by the
inescapable (for us) ontological circumstance that—like it or not—we
find ourselves to exist as human beings, and thus able to function as
free rational agents. Their ultimate inherence in (generic) human needs
determines the appropriateness of our particular, individual ends and
thereby endows a functionalistic pragmatism with a broadly humanistic
value orientation.

We humans are so situated that from <span
style="font-style:italic;">our</span> vantage point (and who else’s can
be decisive for us?) various factors can and should be seen as goods—as
aspects or components of what is in itself a quintessen-tially good end
in its relation to us. Without achieving such goods, we cannot thrive as
human beings—we cannot achieve the condition of well-being that
Aristotle called “flourishing.” Flourishing as <span
style="font-style:italic;">humans</span>, as the sorts of creatures we
are, patently is <span style="font-style:italic;">for us</span> an
intrinsic good (though not, to be sure, necessarily the supreme good).
It “comes with the territory” so to speak, being mandated for us by our
place in nature’s scheme of things. And this desideratum is itself
multifaceted in serving as an umbrella goal that can carry others in its
wake. It must, after all, come to be particularized to the concrete
situation of specific individuals and thereby becomes complex and
variegated.

To be sure, a person’s “appropriate interests” will have a substantial
sector of personal relativity. One person’s self-ideal, shaped in the
light of his own value structure, will—quite appropriately—be different
from that of another. And, moreover, what sorts of interests someone has
will hinge in significant measure on the particular circumstances and
conditions in which they find themselves—in-cluding their wishes and
desires. (In the <span style="font-style:italic;">absence</span> of any
countervailing considerations, getting what I want is in my best
interests.) All the same, there is also a large body of real interests
that people not only share in common but must pursue in common—for
example, as regards standard of living (health and resources) and
quality of life (opportunities and conditions). And both sorts of
interests—the idiosyncratic and the generic—play a determinative role in
the operations of rationality. And both must accordingly figure in a
sensible pragmatism’s concern for the efficacious realization of our
valid objectives.<sup>5</sup>
