# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>NOTES</span>

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">1. The Task of Philosophy</span>

    -   1\. Aristotle, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Metaphysics</span>, 928b10.

    -   2\. There are, of course, very different ways of <span
        style="font-style:italic;">doing</span> philosophy even as there
        are different ways of cooking food. But the enterprise itself is
        characterized by its defining objective: if one isn’t doing that
        sort of thing, then one isn’t pursuing it. (Sewing is not
        cooking food, nor is journalism philosophy.)

    -   3\. William James, “The Sentiment of Rationality,” in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">The Will to Believe and other Essays
        in Popular Philosophy</span> (New York: Longmans Green, 1897),
        63-110, see esp. 78-79.

    -   4\. Quoted in <span style="font-style:italic;">Aristotelis
        Fragmenta Selecta</span>, ed. W. D. Ross (Oxford: Clarendon
        Press, 1955), vii; for the text see page 28. But see also
        Anton-Hermann Chroust, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Aristotle, Protrepicus: A
        Reconstruction</span> (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame
        Press, 1969), 48-50.

    -   5\. F. H. Bradley, <span style="font-style:italic;">Appearance
        and Reality,</span> 2nd ed. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1897), 1.

    -   6\. Paul K. Feyerabend embraces the concurrent use of mutually
        inconsistent scientific theories within a “theoretical
        pluralism.” See his essay, “Problems of Empiricism” in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Beyond the Edge of Certainty</span>,
        ed. R. G. Colodny (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1965),
        145-260, see esp. 164-68.

    -   7\. John Kekes, <span style="font-style:italic;">The Nature of
        Philosophy</span> (Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield, 1980), 196.

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">2. Knowledge and Scepticism</span>

    -   1\. His clear awareness of this made it possible for the
        Platonic Academy to endorse scepticism throughout the middle
        phase of its development in classical antiquity.

    -   2\. Thus one acute thinker has written:

\[W\]hat are my grounds for thinking that I, in my own particular case,
shall die. I am as certain of it in my innermost mind, as I am that I
now live; but what is the distinct evidence on which I allow myself to
be certain? How would I tell it in a court of justice? How should I fare
under a crossexamination upon the grounds of my certitude?^Demonstration
of course I cannot have of a future event. (J. H. Newman, <span
style="font-style:italic;">A Grammar of Assent</span>, \[London and New
York: Longmans, Green, 1913\], chap. 8, pt. 2, sect. I.)

-   3\. Bertrand Russell, <span style="font-style:italic;">Problems of
    Philosophy</span> (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1912), 35.

-   4\. It must be realized that the “certainty” at issue in these
    discussions is not the subjective psychological stare of a <span
    style="font-style:italic;">feeling</span> of certainly at issue in
    locutions like “I <span style="font-style:italic;">feel</span>
    certain that <span style="font-style:italic;">p</span>Rather it is a
    matter of the objective epistemic circumstances, and the relevant
    locutions are of the impersonal character of “I is certain that
    <span style="font-style:italic;">p</span>.” This is crucial to the
    sceptic’s case, “And once we have noticed this distinction, we are
    forced to allow what we are certain of is very much less than we
    should have said otherwise.” (H. A. Pritchard, <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Knowledge and Perception </span>\[Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 1930\], 97.)

-   5\. As Keith Lehrer has put it:

\[I\]t should also be clear why it is that ordinary men commonly, though
incorrectly, believe that they know for certain that some contingent
statements are true. They believe that there is no chance whatever that
they are wrong in thinking some contingent statements are true and thus
feel sure they know for certain that those statements are true. One
reason they feel sure is that they have not reflected upon the ubiquity
of . . . change in all human thought. Once these matters are brought
into focus, we may reasonably conclude that no man knows for certain
that any contingent statement is true. (“Scepticism and Conceptual
Change” in <span style="font-style:italic;">Empirical Knowledge,</span>
eds. R. M. Chisholm and R. J. Swartz, (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1973), 47-58, see esp. 53.)

In a similar vein, L. S. Carrier has recently argued, in effect, that
since belief concerning material objects can in theory turn out to be
mistaken, no one ever knows that he knows such a belief to be true. See
his “Scepticism Made Certain,” <span style="font-style:italic;">Journal
of Philosophy</span> 71 (1974): 140-50.

-   6\. For scepticism and its critique, see Robert Audi, <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Belief, Justifi cation, and
    Knowledge</span> (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1988); A. I. Goldman,
    <span style="font-style:italic;">Epistemology and Cognition</span>
    (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986); Peter Klein, <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Certainty:</span>

<span style="font-style:italic;">A Refutation of Scepticism</span>
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981); Keith Lehrer, <span
style="font-style:italic;">Knowledge</span> (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1974); Robert Nozick, <span
style="font-style:italic;">Philosophical Explanations</span> (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1981); and Peter Unger, <span
style="font-style:italic;">Ignorance: A Case for Scepticism</span>
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975); as well as the author’s <span
style="font-style:italic;">Scepticism: A Critical Reappraisal</span>
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980), which gives extensive references to the
literature.

-   7\. The “problem of knowledge” that figures in much of the
    epistemological literature is thus a creation of those philosophers
    who endow our knowledge claims with a hyperbolic absoluteness never
    envisaged in or countenanced by our ordinary usage of
    knowledge-terminology. Having initially created difficulties by
    distorting our usage, philosophers are then at great pains to try to
    revalidate it. This whole project gives an aura of unrealism to much
    of epistemological discussion. For an interesting discussion of
    relevant issues, see Oliver A. Johnson, <span
    style="font-style:italic;">The Problem of Knowledge</span> (The
    Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1974).

-   8\. On this issue, see J. L. Austin in “Other Minds” (1946),
    reprinted in his <span style="font-style:italic;">Philosophical
    Papers</span> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1961), 44-84. To be sure,
    the operation of the distinction between realistic and hyperbolic
    possibilities of error will to some extent depend upon “the state of
    ‘knowledge’ of the day.” But this simply carries us back to the
    truism that what people reasonably accept as known is
    state-of-knowledge dependent, and the plausibly purported knowledge
    of one era may turn out to be the error of another.

-   9\. Compare to Harry G. Frankfurt, “Philosophical Certainly,” <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Philosophical Review</span> 71 (1962):
    303-27. However, the philosopher (unlike the natural scientist) is
    simply not free to switch over to “technical terms.” His task is to
    elucidate the concepts we actually work with, and in replacing them
    by technical reconstructions, he merely changes the subject.

-   10\. As William James said:

\[Someone\] who says “Better to go without belief forever than believe a
lie!” merely shows his own preponderant private horror of becoming a
dupe....

But I can believe that worse things than being duped may happen to a man
in this world. (<span style="font-style:italic;">The Will to
Believe</span>, \[New York: Longmans, Green, and Co., 1897\], 18-19)

-   11\. C. S. Peirce, <span style="font-style:italic;">Collected
    Papers</span>, Vol. II (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1931),
    sect. 2.112.

-   12\. Further issues relevant to some of this chapter’s themes are
    discussed in the author’s <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Scepticism: A Critical Reappraisal</span>
    (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980).

<!-- -->

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">3. Limits of Science</span>

    -   1\. The author’s <span style="font-style:italic;">Cognitive
        Systematization: A Systems-Theoretic Approach to a Coherentist
        Theory of Knowledge</span> (Oxford: Blackwell, 1979) deals with
        these matters, as does <span style="font-style:italic;">The
        Limits of Science</span> (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
        Press, 1999).

    -   2\. Note that this is independent of the question, “Would we
        ever want to do so?” Do we ever want to answer all those
        predictive questions about ourselves and our environment, or are
        we more comfortable in the condition in which “ignorance is
        bliss”?

    -   3\. S. W. Hawking, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical
        Physics?” <span style="font-style:italic;">Physics Bulletin
        32</span> (1981): 15-17.

    -   4\. This sentiment was abroad among physicists of the <span
        style="font-style:italic;">fin de siecle</span> era of
        1890-1900, see Lawrence Badash, “The Completeness of
        Nineteenth-Century Science,” <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Isis</span> 63 (1972): 48-58. And
        such sentiments are coming back into fashion today, see Richard
        Feynmann, <span style="font-style:italic;">The Character of
        Physical Law</span> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1965), 172. See also
        Gunther Stent, <span style="font-style:italic;">The Coming of
        the Golden Age </span>(Garden City, N.Y.: Natural History Press,
        1969); and S. W. Hawking, “Is the End in Sight for Theoretical
        Physics?” <span style="font-style:italic;">Physics
        Bulletin</span> 32 (1981): 15-17.

    -   5\. See Eber Jeffrey, “Nothing Left to Invent,” <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Journal of the Patent Office
        Society</span> 22 (July 1940): 479-81.

    -   6\. For this inference could only be made if we could move from
        a thesis of the format \~(∃<span
        style="font-style:italic;">r</span>)(<span
        style="font-style:italic;">r εS</span> & <span
        style="font-style:italic;">r</span> 0 <span
        style="font-style:italic;">p</span>) to one of the format
        (∃<span style="font-style:italic;">r</span>)(<span
        style="font-style:italic;">r εS</span> & <span
        style="font-style:italic;">r</span> 0 <span
        style="font-style:italic;">\~p),</span> where “0” represents a
        grounding relationship of “furnishing a good reason” and <span
        style="font-style:italic;">p</span> is, in this case, the
        particular thesis, “<span style="font-style:italic;">S</span>
        will at some point require drastic revision.” That is, the
        inference would go through only if the lack (in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">S</span>) of a good reason for <span
        style="font-style:italic;">p</span> were itself to assure the
        existence (in <span style="font-style:italic;">S</span>) of a
        good reason for \~p. But the transition to this conclusion from
        the given premise would go through only if the former antecedent
        fact itself constituted such a good reason, that is, only if we
        have \~(∃<span style="font-style:italic;">r</span>)(<span
        style="font-style:italic;">r εS</span> & <span
        style="font-style:italic;">r 0 p</span>)0 <span
        style="font-style:italic;">\~p.</span> Thus, the inference would
        go through only if, by the contraposition, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">p</span> 0(∃<span
        style="font-style:italic;">r</span>)(<span
        style="font-style:italic;">r</span> ε<span
        style="font-style:italic;">S</span> & <span
        style="font-style:italic;">r</span> 0 <span
        style="font-style:italic;">p</span>). This thesis claims that
        the vary truth of <span style="font-style:italic;">p</span> will
        itself be a good reason to hold that <span
        style="font-style:italic;">S</span> affords a good reason for
        <span style="font-style:italic;">p—</span>in sum, that <span
        style="font-style:italic;">S</span> is complete.

    -   7\. Some of the issues of this discussion are developed at
        greater length in the author’s <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Methodological Pragmatism:
        Systems-Theoretic Approach to the Theory of Knowledge</span>
        (Oxford: Blackwell, 1977), <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Scientifi c Progress: A Philosophical
        Essay on the Economics of Research in Natural Science</span>
        (Oxford: Blackwell, 1979), and <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Cognitive Systematization</span>
        (Oxford: Blackwell, 1979).

    -   8\. On the theme of this chapter see also the author’s <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Ethical Idealism: An Inquiry into the
        Nature and Function of Ideals</span> (Berkeley and Los Angeles:
        University of California Press, 1987), esp. chap. 6, “The Power
        of Ideals.”

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">4. Realism/Idealism</span>

    -   1\. Bertrand Russell, <span style="font-style:italic;">The
        Problems of Philosophy</span> (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1912),
        58.

    -   2\. The author’s involvement with the defense of this version of
        idealism goes back to his <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Conceptual Idealism</span> (Oxford:
        Basil Blackwell, 1973).

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">5. Intelligent Design</span>

    -   1\. The neo-Platonists Plotinus and Proclus differentiated
        natural <span style="font-style:italic;">phusik∂s </span>love
        (<span style="font-style:italic;">amor naturalis</span>), and
        psychic (<span style="font-style:italic;">psychik∂s</span>) love
        (<span style="font-style:italic;">amor sensitivus</span>) from
        intellectual love: <span style="font-style:italic;">er∂s
        noer∂s</span> (<span style="font-style:italic;">amor
        intellectualis</span> or <span
        style="font-style:italic;">rationalis</span>). In the end, their
        rendition of the Aristotelian idea that “love makes the world go
        round” comes down to having a world developed conformably and
        sympathetically to the demands of the intellect in relation to
        intelligibility.

    -   2\. The most eloquent exponent of nootropism is Teilhard de
        Chardin. Whether the evolutionary emergence of what he calls the
        noosphere will go as far as to reach the ultimate “omega state”
        that he envisions could be seen as speculative and
        eschatological. Yet the fundamental process of ratiotropic
        evolution that he envisions is there for all to see presently,
        irrespective of how far they may be prepared to venture into its
        speculative projection into a yet uncertain future. While in
        their detail the present deliberations differ substantially from
        those of Teilhard, nevertheless their tendency and motivating
        spirit is unquestionably akin to his.

    -   3\. See William S. Dembski, <span style="font-style:italic;">The
        Design Inference: Eliminating Chance Through Small
        Probabilities</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
        1998). The quarrel between orthodox Darwinians and Intelligent
        Design Theorists of the more conservative stamp is not over the
        question of evolution by chance selection but simply over the
        question of whether such selection is strictly random or
        bias-manifestly skewed. What is at issue here is not a choice
        between science versus religion but choice between two rival
        scientific theories.

    -   4\. As regards the Catholic ramifications of the issue, it is
        certainly true that the Church emphasizes the distinction
        between body and soul, and it views the former, soul, not as a
        product of the physical causality of nature but of a special act
        of creation on the part of God. But this of course need not (and
        indeed should not) be construed as creating an unmendable breach
        between doctrine and evolution, since there simply is no need to
        claim that evolution creates souls rather than saying that it
        affords fitting occasions for the creation of souls.

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">6. Fallacies Regarding Free
    Will</span>

    -   1\. Daniel Dennett, “I Could not Have Done Otherwise—So What,”
        <span style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Philosophy</span> 81
        (1984): 553-65 (my italics). Compare to Dennett, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free
        Will Worth Wanting</span> (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1984), 16.

    -   2\. Note that while predetermination entails precedence
        determination, the converse is not the case: precedence
        determination does not entail predetermination.

    -   3\. “Das wahre Causalprincip steht . . . der Freiheit nicht im
        Wege,” in Lotze, <span style="font-style:italic;">Microcosmus:
        An Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the World,</span>
        vol. I (New York: Scribner & Welford, 1890), 16.

    -   4\. Daniel Dennett, <span style="font-style:italic;">Freedom
        Evolves</span> (New York: Viking, 2003), 120.

    -   5\. Ibid.

    -   6\. Spinoza, <span style="font-style:italic;">Ethics</span>,
        Book I, Appendix.

    -   7\. Lotze, <span style="font-style:italic;">Microcosmus: An
        Essay Concerning Man and His Relation to the World,</span> vol.
        I (New York: Scribner & Welford, 1890), 287.

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">7. Mind and Matter</span>

    -   1\. Theodore Honderich, ed., <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Essays on Freedom of Action</span>
        (London: Routledge, 1973), 189. However the author emphatically
        declines to take a position on the issue of whether brain state
        causes the mind state (190), and also passes the reverse idea
        over in discrete silence. But it is just this prospect—not so
        much of <span style="font-style:italic;">causation</span> as of
        state-change <span
        style="font-style:italic;">initiation</span>—that lies at the
        heart of the present deliberations.

    -   2\. Moritz Schlick, <span style="font-style:italic;">Problems of
        Ethics</span> (New York: Dover Publications, 1962), chap. 8.

    -   3\. On mind-brain interaction, see J⅛gen Boeck’s “Bietet die
        Gehirnforsc-hung Einblick in Freiraume menschlichen und
        tierischen Verhaltens,” in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Aspekte der Freiheit,</span> ed.
        Dieter Henrich, 9-22 (Regensburg: Mittelbayerische Druckerei- u.
        Verlagsgesellschaft, 1982).

    -   4\. There are a vast number of fine books on the subject. A
        random sampling includes, John C. Eccles, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">How the Self Controls its
        Brain</span> (Berlin: Springer, 1994); Theodore Honderich, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">A Theory of Determinism,</span> 2
        vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990); Gary Watson, ed., <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Free Will</span> (Oxford: Oxford
        University Press, 1982).

    -   5\. R. H. Lotze, “Das Verhaltnis der Seele zum Leib ist stets
        das einer Herrschaft,” in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Medizinische Psychologie oder
        Physiologie der Seele</span> (Leipzig, 1852), 289.

    -   6\. See Immanuel Kant, <span style="font-style:italic;">Critique
        of Pure Reason</span>, A803 = B831.

    -   7\. The reverse will not of course be the case.

    -   8\. Dickinson Miller writing as R. E. Hobart, “Free Will as
        Involving Determination and Inconceivable Without it,” <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Mind</span> 43, no. 169 (1934): 1-27.

    -   9\. John Stuart Mill’s <span style="font-style:italic;">A System
        of Logic</span> (London: John W. Parker, West Strand, 1843) is
        one of the earliest works that is altogether sound on the issues
        of this paragraph.

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">8. Pragmatism and Practical
    Rationality</span>

    -   1\. And what other view point would it possibly make sense for
        us to adopt here?

    -   2\. Other aspects of the presently deliberated issues are
        treated in the author’s <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Rationality</span> (Oxford: Oxford
        University Press, 1986).

    -   3\. The issue goes back to the specification of the “basics”
        (<span style="font-style:italic;">principiae</span>) of the
        human good in the Middle Academy (Carneades)—things like the
        soundness and maintenance of the members of the body, health,
        sound senses, freedom from pain, physical vigor, and physical
        attractiveness. Compare with Cicero, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">De fi nibus</span>, V. vii. 19.

    -   4\. For strict consistency, a rigorous Humean should, by
        analogy, hold that cognitive reason too is only
        hypothetical—that it only tells us that certain beliefs must be
        abandoned <span style="font-style:italic;">if</span>we hold
        certain others, and that no beliefs are contrary to reason as
        such, so that “it is not contrary to reason to think one’s
        finger larger than the entire earth.”

    -   5\. Further issues relevant to this chapter’s deliberations are
        discussed in the author’s <span style="font-style:italic;">The
        Validity of Values: Human Values in Pragmatic Perspective</span>
        (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993).

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">9. The Demands of Morality</span>

    -   1\. It is to the credit of the utilitarian tradition that it has
        stressed this gearing of morality to the benefit of people, for
        it clearly establishes the issues as subject to rational
        deliberation. But it is to its discredit that it has seen these
        benefits in terms of pleasure and mere personal preference
        alone, so that the veneer of rationality is very thin indeed.

    -   2\. Compare to J. N. Findlay, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Language, Mind and Value</span>
        (London: Allen & Unwyn, 1963), chaps. 5 and 6.

    -   3\. Though their choices do affect how these interests operate.
        Once you have chosen Helen to be your future wife, her attitude
        towards you becomes a matter of substantial interest for you.

    -   4\. Does this way of viewing the matter put subrational, salient
        actions outside the pale of moral concern? By no means. For it
        matters deeply to rational agents how other rational agents
        treat animals—or for that matter any other sorts of beings that
        have interests capable of being injured. We have a substantial
        interest in how others comport themselves who also belong to the
        type that we see ourselves as belonging to.

    -   5\. But just who are the “we” at issue. Clearly, those who are
        members of our linguistic community—those who realize that when
        we speak of “morality” we mean <span
        style="font-style:italic;">morality</span> (with the various
        things involved therein), and not, say, basket weaving.

    -   6\. The analogy of natural law is helpful: “Theft, murder,
        adultery and all injuries are forbidden by the laws of nature;
        but which is to be called theft, what murder, what adultery,
        what injury in a citizen, this is not to be determined by the
        natural but by the civil law.” (Thomas Hobbes, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">De Cive</span>, chap. IV, sect. 16).
        St. Thomas holds that appropriate human law must be subordinate
        to the natural law by way of “particular determination,” with
        different human laws, varying from place to place, nevertheless
        representing appropriate concretizations of the same underlying
        principle of natural law (See <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Summa Theologica</span>, IaIIae,
        questions 95-96).

    -   7\. Aspects of these issues are helpfully discussed in Susan
        Wolf, “Two Levels of Pluralism,” <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Ethics</span> 102 (1992): 785-98.

    -   8\. After all, “the actual variations in the moral code (of
        different groups) are more readily explained by the hypothesis
        that they reflect different ways of life than by the hypothesis
        that they express perceptions, most of them seriously inadequate
        and badly distorted, of objective values” (J. L. Mackie, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Ethics : Inventing Right and
        Wrong</span> \[Hammondsworth: Penguin Books, 1977\], 37).

    -   9\. Stephen L. Darwall, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Impartial Reason</span> (Ithaca, NY:
        Cornell University Press, 1983), 105.

    -   10\. Further issues relevant to some of this chapter’s themes
        are discussed in the author’s <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Moral Absolutes: An Essay on the
        Nature and Rationale of Morality </span>(New York: Peter Lang,
        1989).

    -   11\. To be sure, someone may ask: “Why think of ourselves in
        this way—why see ourselves as free rational agents?” But of
        course to ask this is to ask for a good rational reason and is
        thus already to take a stance within the framework of
        rationality. In theory, one can of course “resign” from the
        community of rational beings, abandoning all claims to being
        more than “mere animals.” But this is a step one cannot <span
        style="font-style:italic;">justify</span>—there are no
        satisfactory rational grounds for taking it. And this is
        something most of us realize instinctively. The appropriateness
        of acknowledging others as responsible agents whenever possible
        holds in our own case as well.

    -   12\. Immanuel Kant portrayed the obligation at issue in the
        following terms:

First, it is one’s duty to raise himself out of the crudity of his
nature—out of his animality (<span style="font-style:italic;">quoad
actum</span>) more and more to humanity, by which alone he is capable of
setting himself ends. It is man’s \[paramount\] duty to . . . supply by
instruction what is lacking in his knowledge, and to correct his
mistakes....\[T\]his end \[is\] his duty in order that he may . . . be
worthy of

the humanity dwelling within him. (<span
style="font-style:italic;">Metaphysics of Morals</span>, 387, <span
style="font-style:italic;">Akad</span>.)

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">10. By Whose Standards?</span>

    -   1\. See Immanuel Kant, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Foundations in the Metaphysics of
        Minds</span>, trans. Lewis White Beck (Indianapolis and New
        York: Bobbs Merril, 1959).

    -   2\. William James was surely right to insist that, “There is no
        point of view absolutely public and universal” (<span
        style="font-style:italic;">Talks to Teachers on
        Psychology</span> \[New York: Henry Regnery, 1899\], 4).

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">11. Pluralism and Concretization
    Quandaries</span>

    -   1\. The author’s <span style="font-style:italic;">Pluralism:
        Against the Demand for Consensus</span> (Oxford: Clarendon
        Press, 1993), offers further perspectives on some of the themes
        of this chapter.

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">12. The Power of Ideals</span>

    -   1\. J. O. Urmson, “Saints and Heroes,” in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Essays in Moral Philosophy</span>,
        ed. A. I. Melden (Seattle: University of Washington Press,
        1958). On this theme, see also David Heyd, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Supererogation</span>: <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Its Status in Ethical Theory</span>
        (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).

    -   2\. “Nicht minder richtig aber ist, dass das Mogliche sehr oft
        nur dadurch erreicht wurde, dass man nach dem jenseits seiner
        Kraft liegenden Unmoglichen griff.” Max Weber, “Der Sinn der
        ‘Wertfreiheit’ in den soziologischen und okonomischen
        Wissenschaften,” <span style="font-style:italic;">Logos</span> 7
        (1917-18): 63; reprinted in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Gesammelte Aufsatze zur
        Wissenschafislehre</span> (Tubingen: J. C. B. Mohr, 1922), 476.

    -   3\. Aldous Huxley, “Inquiry into the Nature of Ideals and the
        Methods Employed for Their Realization,” in <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Ends and Means</span> (London: Chatto
        & Windus, 1937), 1.

    -   4\. L. Susan Stebbing, <span style="font-style:italic;">Ideals
        and Illusions</span> (London: Watts & Co., 1948), 132-33.

    -   5\. Further issues relevant to some of this chapter’s themes are
        discussed in the author’s <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Ethical Idealism: A Study ofthe
        Import of Ideals</span> (Berkeley, Los Angeles, London:
        University of California Press, 1987).

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">13. Science and Religion</span>

This chapter is dedicated to my daughter Catherine, who encouraged me to
discuss the question that it addresses. I am grateful to Robert Kaita,
James V. Maher, and Aug Tong for constructive suggestions.

-   1\. William James, <span style="font-style:italic;">The Varieties of
    Religious Experience</span> (New York & London: Longmans Green,
    1902), 487.

-   2\. Reading Blaise Pascal’s <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Thoughts</span> (<span
    style="font-style:italic;">Pensees</span>) may give you good
    guidance here! And a vast body of excellent material is available on
    the topic of this chapter. Michael Ruse’s <span
    style="font-style:italic;">Can a Darwinian be a Christian</span>
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001) is a good example. A
    fine contemporary anthology is A. R. Peacock’s <span
    style="font-style:italic;">The Sciences and Theology in the
    Twentieth Century</span> (Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press,
    1985). The Web site of the American Scientific Affiliation (ASA): A
    Fellowship of Christians in Science (<http://www.asa3>.
    org/asa/topics/empty/WebList/List1WebBooks.html) points to many
    excellent discussions of these topics. Some stimulating
    deliberations are offered in the personal statements of Francis S.
    Collins’s <span style="font-style:italic;">The Language of God: A
    Scientist Presents Evidence for Belief</span> (New York: Free
    Press, 2006) and Owen Gingerich’s <span
    style="font-style:italic;">God’s Universe</span> (Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 2006). An interesting collection of interviews
    with twelve leading scientists is presented in P. Clayton and J.
    Schaal’s <span style="font-style:italic;">Practicing Science, Living
    Faith</span> (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007). Two
    scholarly journals of excellent quality are devoted to cognate
    issues: <span style="font-style:italic;">Faith and Philosophy</span>
    and <span style="font-style:italic;">Zygon: Journal of Religion and
    Science</span>. The Templeton Foundation has sponsored numberless
    conferences and workshops for constructive interchange between
    scientists and theologians. Many scientific investigators are
    nowadays pursuing lines of research that have religious
    ramifications. An example of a scientifically sophisticated paper of
    theological bearing, whose general drift, at least, may be
    accessible to a scientifically untutored reader, is Euan J. Squires,
    “Do We Live in the Simplest Possible Interesting World?” <span
    style="font-style:italic;">The European Journal of Physics</span> 2
    (1981): 55-57.

<!-- -->

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">14. On the Improvability of the
    World</span>

    -   1\. See, for example, R. K. Perkins, Jr., “An Atheistic Argument
        from the Improvability of the Universe,” <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Nous</span> 17 (1983): 239-50.

    -   2.<span style="font-style:italic;"> Timaeus</span>, 29E-30B
        (emphasis added).

    -   3\. Dr. Seuss, <span style="font-style:italic;">Happy Birthday
        to You</span> (New York: Random House Children’s Books, 1959),
        10.

    -   4\. Edward Norton Lorenz, “Deterministic Nonperiodic Flow,”
        <span style="font-style:italic;">Journal of Atmospheric
        Sciences</span> 20 (1963): 130-41.

    -   5\. See J. L. Mackie, “Freedom and Omnipotence,” <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Mind</span> 64 (1955): 200-12.

    -   6\. Mackie’s preference for a totally sinless world overlooks
        the fact that the Catholic theology has long characterized the
        sin of Adam as a <span style="font-style:italic;">felix
        culpa</span>—a fortunate sin—because it paved the way to the
        entire arena of atonement and salvation.

    -   7\. Leibniz holds that it is erroneous to think “I could have
        chosen otherwise.” Had that choice come out differently, it
        would not have been <span style="font-style:italic;">you</span>
        who did so but yet another closely similar individual: the
        choice difference would ipso facto engender a difference in the
        chooser.

    -   8\. Voltaire, <span style="font-style:italic;">Candide,</span>
        chap. iv. For a better understanding of Leibniz’s stance, see
        his <span style="font-style:italic;">Discourse on
        Metaphysics</span>, sec. 6; <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Principle of Nature and of
        Grace</span>, sec. 10; and <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Theodicee,</span> sec. 208.

-   <span style="font-weight:bold;">15. Why Philosophy?</span>

    -   1\. The use of the term quietism to characterize Wittgenstein’s
        antiphilo-sophical position apparently became current in Oxford
        during the 1970s with such philosophers as Crispin Wright, Simon
        Blackburn, and Nick Zangwill. It has been enroute to
        transmutation from Wittgensteinian exegesis to outright advocacy
        in such neo-Wittgensteinian philosophers as Cora Diamond and
        John McDowell. See David G. Stern, <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Wittgenstein’s Philosophical
        Investigations</span> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
        2004), 168-70.

    -   2\. W. L. Reese, ed., <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Dictionary of Philosophy and
        Religion</span> (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press,
        1980), 628.

    -   3\. Further issues relevant to some of this chapter’s themes are
        discussed in the author’s <span
        style="font-style:italic;">Conditionals</span> (Cambridge: MIT
        Press, 2007).
