# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>Knowledge and Scepticism</span>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">The Sceptic’s “No Certainty”
Argument</span>

Claims to knowledge do not admit of qualification by any element of
doubt or cavil: authentic knowledge is only that which is certain and
undeniably true. It makes no sense to say “ <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span> knows that, but it may possibly not
be so.” If there were any questions about it we could have to say “<span
style="font-style:italic;">X thinks</span> he knows that\_\_\_\_\_\_”
instead of the

unqualified “ <span style="font-style:italic;">X</span> knows that”

But do we ever achieve absolute certainty? Perhaps sometimes in matters
relating to oneself—as per Descartes’ example, “I am thinking.” But
surely impersonal matters of objective fact are in a more difficult
position.

On this basis, philosophers since Plato’s<sup>1</sup> day have stressed
the unattainability of absolutes in our knowledge regarding this world.
And a straightforward and plausible argument for scepticism is at work
here. If a contention is to be absolutely secure relative to the grounds
by which it is supported, then its content must not go beyond the
content of those contentions that serve as grounds for the claim.

But with claims of objective fact there is always an “evidential gap,”
because of the data at our disposal we exhaust the content of such
claims. “The apple <span style="font-style:italic;">looks red</span> to
me” is an autobiographical statement about me, while “The apple <span
style="font-style:italic;">is red</span>” is an objective claim that has
involvements (for example, how it will look to others in different sorts
of light) that I have not checked and cannot check in toto. Factual
claims are invariably such that there is a wide gap between the evidence
we need to have at our disposal to make a warranted claim and the
content of this claim. The milkman leaves the familiar sort of bottle of
white liquid on the doorstep. One does not hesitate to call it “milk.” A
small cylinder of hard, white, earthen material is lying next to the
blackboard. One does not hesitate to call it “chalk.” The content of
such claims clearly ranges far wider than our meager evidence and
extends to chemical composition, sources of origin, behavior under
pressure, and so on and so forth. And this story is a standard one. For
the fact is that all of our statements regarding matters of objective
fact (that is, “That is an apple” as opposed to “Something appears to me
to be an apple”) are such that the content of the claim—its overall set
of commitments and implications—moves far beyond the (relatively meager)
evidence for it that is actually at our disposal. And this evidential
gap between the evidence in hand and the substantive contention at issue
seemingly foredooms any prospect of attaining certainty.<sup>2</sup> To
all intents and purposes, this circumstance squarely violates the
absolutism of claims to knowledge. What we have called “the facts of
cognitive life” are to all appearances such that the definitive
conditions for knowledge cannot be met in the factual domain. This, at
any rate, is the sceptic’s contention.

The sceptic bolsters cognitive nihilism by inserting into the evidential
gap the sharp wedge of a knowledge-defeating possibil-ity—the
supposition that life is but a dream, or the hypothesis of the Cartesian
archdeceiver and its latter-day successor, the wicked, powerful
scientist. The unattainability of any knowledge in matters of objective
fact is advanced by the sceptic on the basis of the impossibility in
principle of ruling out such certainty-defeating possibilities. Do we,
for example, really <span style="font-style:italic;">know for
sure</span> that the person who jumps off the Empire State Building will
crash downwards? Why should they not float gently skywards? This would,
no doubt, surprise us, but surprises do happen; in such matters of
generalization “we may be in no better position than the chicken which
unexpectedly has its neck wrung.”<sup>3</sup> After all, the sceptic
insists that we are caught in the uncomfortable grip of the “No
Certainty” Argument:<sup>4</sup>

-   1\. All knowledge-claims are committed to a demand for absolute
    certainty.

-   2\. Objective factual claims are always evidence-transcending: they
    are never in a position to meet absolutistic demands. Our objective
    factual claims can never amount to actual <span
    style="font-style:italic;">knowledge</span>.<sup>5</sup>

The task of these present deliberations is to examine whether—and
how—this sort of sceptical argumentation can be defeated.<sup>6</sup>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">The Role of Certainty</span>

Scepticism’s insistence to the contrary notwithstanding, a claim’s being
absolutely certain—or even <span style="font-style:italic;">being</span>
true—in fact just is not a necessary precondition for staking a
rationally warranted <span style="font-style:italic;">claim</span> to
knowledge. Consider the two propositions:

-   •<span style="font-style:italic;"> P</span> is justifiably held by
    <span style="font-style:italic;">X</span> to be true.

-   •<span style="font-style:italic;"> P</span> is true.

Does the first entail or presuppose the second? Surely not. For the
evidence in hand that suffices to justify someone in holding a thesis to
be true need not provide a deductive guarantee of this thesis. A
strictly analogous situation is presented with the pair:

-   •<span style="font-style:italic;"> P</span> is justifiably held by
    <span style="font-style:italic;">X</span> to be certain.

-   •<span style="font-style:italic;"> P</span> is certain.

Again, the first proposition does not entail or require the second. The
standard gap between the epistemic issue of what someone justifiably
holds to be and the ontological issue of what is again comes into the
picture. One must be willing to admit in general the existence of a gap
between warranted assertability and ultimate correctness, holding that
on occasion even incorrect theses can be maintained with due warrant.
And there is no decisive reason for blocking the application of this
general rule to certainty-claims in particular. It would be a fallacy to
think that justified claims about certainty must themselves be certain.

For “certainty” here must not be construed to mean “derived by
infallible processes from theoretically unassailable premises,” since
one is surely justified in “being certain” in circumstances that do not
logically preclude any possibility of error. The operative mode of
“certainty” here is not some absolutistic sense of logical
infallibility—it is the realistic concept that underlies our actual,
real-life processes of argumentation and reasoning. It is impossible to
give too heavy emphasis to the crucial fact that claiming a thesis to be
“certain” says no more than it is as certain as can be in the nature of
the case—as certain as a thesis of this sort could reasonably be
rendered. And this does not—and need not—preclude <span
style="font-style:italic;">any possibility</span> of error, but rather
<span style="font-style:italic;">any real or genuine possibility</span>
of error.

A claim to knowledge does not—as the sceptics charge—trans-gress by
offering in principle infeasible guarantees; it simply means that one is
to rest secure in the assurance that everything has indeed been done
that one can possibly ask for within the limits of reasonableness to
ascertain the fact at issue.

To claim knowledge is thus to accept an assurance that all due care and
caution has been exercised to ensure that any <span
style="font-style:italic;">real</span> possibility of error can be
written off: it issues a guarantee that every proper safeguard has been
exercised. This is exactly the reason why the statement, “I know <span
style="font-style:italic;">p</span>, but might be mistaken” is
self-inconsistent. For the man who claims to know that <span
style="font-style:italic;">p</span> thereby issues a guarantee which the
qualification “but I might be mistaken” effectively revokes. What is
established by the self-defeating nature of locutions of the type “I
know that <span style="font-style:italic;">p,</span> but I <span
style="font-style:italic;">might</span> well be wrong” is thus not that
knowledge is inherently indefeasible, but simply that knowledge-claims
offer guarantees and assurances so strong as to preempt any safeguarding
qualifications: they preclude abridgment of the sort at issue in
protective clauses like “I might well be wrong.”

It is not possible to overemphasize that the certainty of knowledge is
the certainty of life—realistic certainty and not that of some
transcendentally inaccessible realm.<sup>7</sup> It is the certainty
that precludes any realistic possibility of error: any possibility of
error that is “worth bothering about,” the closing of every loophole
that one can reasonably ask for.<sup>8</sup> This is, and must be so,
because knowledge-claims are asserted and denied here, in this world,
and not in some transcendentally inaccessible one. The norms and ground
rules governing their use must be appropriately applicable (at least in
principle) here and now. Accordingly, there is no contradiction in terms
involved in saying that the absolutistic aspect of a knowledge-claim is
compatible with an element of (claim-externalized) qualification.

As we have seen, the “epistemic gap” between available evidence and
objectively claimed content means that the falsity of our objective
factual claims is always logically compatible with the evidence at our
disposal. But this undoubted fact remains epistemically irrelevant. To
be sure, the evidential gap is real and undeniable. And since it exists,
it is always possible to insert a hypothesis into it to sever what we
ourselves think to be the case from “the real truth of the matter.” But
there are hypotheses and hypotheses—sensible ones as well as those which
cannot but strike us as strained and bizarre. A hypothesis capable of
undoing the thesis that “There are rocks in the world” (to take an
ordinary-life example) or that in the present cosmic era <span
style="font-style:italic;">s</span> = ½gt<sup>2</sup> (to take a
scientific one) would illustrate the latter, farfetched variety. That
either thesis is false is “unthinkable”—any hypothesis capable of
undoing the thesis at issue is too peculiar and “unrealistic” to afford
a real possibility of error. Admittedly there are such (farfetched)
hypotheses and such (implausible) possibilities. But their very
farfetchedness and implausibility mean that the possibilities of error
they pose are not realistic. The upsets at issue are simply too
drastic—the whole demonology of deceitful deities, powerful mad
scientists, and so on brings our entire view of the world crashing down
about our ears. Such possibilities cannot be ruled out from the domain
of the imaginable, but we can and do exclude them from the arena of the
practical politics of the cognitive situation.

There is no changing the fact that the person who claims to know
something also becomes committed thereby to its implications (its
logical consequences and its presuppositions). But a claim to knowledge
can be made reasonably and defensibly even by one who realizes that it
involves commitments and ramifications that may not stand up in the
final analysis to the challenges of a difficult and often recalcitrant
world. No assurances that extend beyond the limits of the possible can
be given—or sensibly asked for.

It is thus needful to speak of a contrast between “the hyperbolic
certainty of the philosopher” and “the mundane certainty of the plain
man” in the setting of the actual transaction of our cognitive
busi-ness.<sup>9</sup> Philosophers have often felt driven to a
conception of knowledge so rigid as to yield the result that there is
little if anything left that one can ever be said to know. Indeed,
sceptical thinkers of this inclination launch upon an explication of the
“nature of knowledge” that sets the standards of its attainment so high
that it becomes, in principle, impossible for anything to meet such
hyperbolic demands. Against this tendency, it is proper to insist that
while what is known must indeed be true—and certainly true—it is
nevertheless in order to insist that the conceptions at issue can and
should be so construed that there are realistic and realizable
circumstances in which our claims to <span
style="font-style:italic;">certainly</span> and to <span
style="font-style:italic;">knowledge</span> are perfectly legitimate and
altogether justified. A doctrine that admits the defeasibility of quite
appropriate claims to knowledge need involve no contradictions in terms.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Pragmatic Inconsistency</span>

The difference between real and merely conjectural possibilities of
error is crucial for rational warrant for claims or concessions to
knowledge. A real possibility must be case-specific and not abstractly
generic and somehow based on general principles alone. And this, it must
be insisted, is not incompatible with the existence of a “purely
theoretical” (let alone “purely logical”) prospect of error. There is
thus no real anomaly in holding on the one hand that knowledge “must be
certain” (in the <span style="font-style:italic;">effective</span> sense
of this term) and on the other hand that a valid knowledge claim “might
possibly be wrong” (with “might” construed in the light of a merely
theoretical or “purely logical” mode of possibility).

For example, we need not in the usual course of things exert ourselves
in an endeavor to rule out the imaginative sceptic’s demonology of
uncannily real dreams, deceitful demons, powerful evil scientists, and
so forth. The general principles and presumptions of the domain suffice
to put all this aside. To claim knowledge in specific cases, all we need
to do is eliminate those case-specific considerations that would
countervail against the claim at issue in a realistic and plausible way.

If we sometimes fall into error even when doing the best we can, how can
we tell that we have not done so in the present case? And if we cannot
<span style="font-style:italic;">guarantee</span> truth, then how can we
speak of <span style="font-style:italic;">knowledge</span>?

The answer is simple. If we have done all that can reasonably be asked
of us, the best that can realistically be done, then there can be no
need for any <span style="font-style:italic;">further</span> assurance.
The objection suggests that we must be in a position to do better than
the best we can. And this is of course absurd—and therefore cannot and
must not be asked of us.

Accordingly, the “No Certainty” Argument becomes invalidated. It is not
true that knowledge claims are committed to a demand for absolute
certainty in any hyperbolically inaccessible way. They are indeed
committed to a demand for certainty, but this “certainty” must be
construed realistically—in the effective, mundane, and practical sense
of the term. The certainty at issue in our knowledge-claims is not
inherently unattainable; it is simply that the grounding in hand must be
strong enough to indicate that further substantiation is superfluous in
the sense of yielding every reasonable assurance that the thing at issue
is as certain as something of its sort need appropriately be. To repeat:
it suffices to ask for an adequate grounding for these claims; a
logically exhaustive grounding is not a reasonable requirement, for the
simple reason—so eloquently stressed by the sceptic himself—that it is
in principle incapable of being satisfied.

The sceptic sets up standards upon “knowledge” that are so unrealistic
as to move outside the range of considerations at work in the conception
as it actually functions in the language. He insists upon construing
knowledge in such a way as to foist upon the cognitivist a Sisyphus-like
task by subjecting all knowledge-claims to an effectively
undischargeable burden of proof. But this hyperbolic standard separates
the sceptic from the concept of knowledge as it functions in common life
and in (most) philosophical discussions.

Clearly, if it is <span style="font-style:italic;">knowledge</span> as
the language deals with it that we propose to discuss—and not some
artificial construct whose consideration constitutes a change of
subject—then we must abide by the ground rules of the conceptual scheme
that is at issue. And this simply is not a negotiable matter of playing
the game by <span style="font-style:italic;">X’</span>s rules instead of
<span style="font-style:italic;">Y’</span>s. It is not a conventional
game that is defined by the rules we arbitrarily adopt, but an
impersonal set of rules established in the public instrumentality of a
language. We must not afford the sceptic the luxury of a permission to
rewrite, at his or her own whim, the warranting standards for the
terminology of our cognitive discourse.

The sceptic simply is not free to impose hyperbolic probative standards
upon us. If sceptics wish to dispute about knowledge, they must take the
concept as they find it in the language-based conceptual system that we
actually use. (They cannot substitute a more rigoristic standard for
counting as knowledge, any more than they can substitute a more
rigoristic standard for counting as a dog, say a standard that ruled
Chihuahuas out as just too small.) In failing to make effective contact
with the conceptual scheme in which our actual knowledge-claims in fact
function, the sceptic assumes an irrational posture in the debate. And
the crucial fact is that our actual standards here are rooted in the
ground rules for rational controversy and the conditions for making out
a conclusive (probatively solid) case, ground rules and conditions in
which all of the standard mechanisms of presumptions and burden of proof
are embedded.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Scepticism and Risk</span>

The scientific researcher, the inquiring philosopher, and the plain
human all desire and strive for information about the “real” world. The
sceptic rejects their ventures as vain and their hopes as foredoomed to
disappointment from the very outset. As the sceptic sees it, any and all
sufficiently trustworthy information about factual matters is simply
unavailable as a matter of general principle. To put such a radical
scepticism into a sensible perspective, it is useful to consider the
issue of cognitive rationality in the light of the situation of risk
taking in general.

There are three very different sorts of personal approaches to risk and
three very different sorts of personalities corresponding to these
approaches, as follows:

Type 1: <span style="font-style:italic;">Risk avoiders</span>

Type 2: <span style="font-style:italic;">Risk calculators</span>

Type 2.1: <span style="font-style:italic;">Cautious</span>

Type 2.2: <span style="font-style:italic;">Daring</span>

Type 3: <span style="font-style:italic;">Risk seekers</span>

The type 1, risk-avoidance approach calls for risk aversion and evasion.
Its adherents have little or no tolerance for risk and gambling. Their
approach to risk is altogether negative. Their mottos are: take no
chances, always expect the worst, and play it safe.

The type 2, risk-calculating approach to risk is more realistic. It is a
guarded middle-of-the-road position, based on due care and calculation.
It comes in two varieties. The type 2.1, cautiously-calculating approach
sees risk taking as subject to a negative presumption, which can,
however, be defeated by suitably large benefits. Its line is: avoid
risks unless it is relatively clear that a suitably large gain beckons
at sufficiently suspicious odds. It reflects the path of prudence and
guarded caution. The type 2.2, daringly-calculating approach sees risk
taking as subject to a positive presumption, which can, however, be
defeated by suitably large negativities. Its line is: be prepared to
take risks unless it is relatively clear that an unacceptably large loss
threatens at sufficiently inauspicious odds. It reflects the path of
optimistic hopefulness.

The type 3, risk-seeking approach sees risk as something to be welcomed
and courted. Its adherents close their eyes to danger and take a rosy
view of risky situations. The mind of the risk seeker is intent on the
delightful situation of a favorable issue of events: the sweet savor of
success is already in his nostrils. Risk seekers are chance takers and
go-for-broke gamblers. They react to risk the way an old warhorse
responds to the sound of the musketry: with eager anticipation and
positive relish. Their motto is: things will work out.

In the conduct of practical affairs, risk avoiders are hypercautious;
they have no stomach for uncertainty and insist on playing it absolutely
safe. In any potentially unfavorable situation, the mind of the risk
avoider is given to imagining the myriad things that could go wrong.
Risk seekers, on the other hand, leap first and look later, apparently
counting on a benign fate to ensure that all will be well; they dwell in
the heady atmosphere of “anything may happen.” Risk calculators take a
middle-of-the-road approach. Proceeding with care, they take due
safeguards but still run risks when the situation looks sufficiently
favorable. It is thus clear that people can have very different
attitudes toward risk.

The situation with regard to specifically cognitive risks can be
approached as simply a special case of the general strategies sketched
above. In particular, it is clear that risk avoidance stands coordinate
with scepticism. The sceptic’s line is: run no risk of error; take no
chances; accept nothing that does not come with ironclad guarantees. And
the proviso here is largely academic, seeing that little if anything in
this world comes with ironclad guarantees—certainly nothing by way of
interesting knowledge. By contrast, the adventuresome syncretist is
inclined to think that anything goes. His cognitive stance is tolerant
and open to input from all quarters. He is gullible, as it were, and
stands ready to endorse everything and to see good on all sides. The
evidentialist, on the other hand, conducts his cognitive business with
comparative care and calculation, regarding various sorts of claims as
perfectly acceptable, provided that the evidential circumstances are
duly favorable.

Turning now to the specifically cognitive case, it may be observed that
the sceptic succeeds splendidly in averting misfortunes of the second
kind. He makes no errors of commission; by accepting nothing, he accepts
nothing false. But, of course, he loses out on the opportunity to obtain
any sort of information. The sceptic thus errs on the side of safety,
even as the syncretist errs on that of gullibility. The sensible course
is clearly that of a prudent calculation of risks.

The sceptic accepts nothing, the evidentialist only the chosen few, the
syncretist virtually anything. In effect, the positions at issue in
scepticism, syncretism, and evidentialism simply replicate, in the
specifically cognitive domain, the various approaches to risks at large.
It must, however, be recognized that in general two fundamentally
different kinds of misfortunes are possible in situations where risks
are run and chances taken:

-   1\. We reject something that, as it turns out, we should have
    accepted. We decline to take the chance, we avoid running the risk
    at issue, but things turn out favorably after all, so that we lose
    out on the gamble.

-   2\. We accept something that, as it turns out, we should have
    rejected. We do take the chance and run the risk at issue, but
    things go wrong, so that we lose the gamble.

If we are risk seekers, we will incur few misfortunes of the first kind,
but, things being what they are, many of the second kind will befall us.
On the other hand, if we are risk avoiders, we shall suffer few
misfortunes of the second kind, but shall inevitably incur many of the
first. The overall situation has the general structure depicted in
display 2.1.

Clearly, the reasonable thing to do is to adopt a policy that minimizes
misfortunes overall. It is thus evident that both type 1 and type 3
approaches will, in general, fail to be rationally optimal. Both
approaches engender too many misfortunes for comfort. The sensible and
prudent thing is to adopt the middle-of-the-road policy of

<div>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Display 2.1. </span>Risk Acceptance and
Misfortunes

Number of (significant) misfortunes

![](main-2.jpg)

Type 1     Type 2.1      Type 2.2

(Risk      (Cautious     (Daring

avoiders)   calculators)    calculators)

Type 3 (Risk seekers)

</div>

Increasing risk acceptance (in % of situations) risk calculation,
striving as best we can to balance the positive risks of outright loss
against the negative ones of lost opportunity. Rationality thus
contraindicates approaches of type 1 and type 2, taking the line of the
counsel: neither avoid nor court risks but manage them prudently in the
search for an overall minimization of misfortunes. The rule of reason
calls for sensible management and a prudent calculation of risks; it
standardly enjoins upon us the Aristotelian golden mean between the
extremes of risk avoidance and risk seeking.

Being mistaken is unquestionably a negativity. When we accept something
false, we have failed in our endeavors to get a clear view of things—to
answer our questions correctly. And moreover, mistakes tend to ramify,
to infect environing issues. If I (correctly) realize that <span
style="font-style:italic;">P</span> logically entails <span
style="font-style:italic;">a,</span> but incorrectly believe not-<span
style="font-style:italic;">a,</span> then I am constrained to accept
not-<span style="font-style:italic;">P,</span> which may well be quite
wrong. Error is fertile of further error. So quite apart from practical
matters (suffering painful practical consequences when things go wrong),
there are also the purely cognitive penalties of mistakes—entrapment in
an incorrect view of things. All this must be granted and taken into
account. But the fact remains that errors of commission are not the only
sorts of misfortune there are.<sup>10</sup> Ignorance, lack of
information, cognitive disconnection from the world’s course of
things—in short, errors of omission—are also negativities of substantial
proportions. This too is something we must work into our reckoning.

In claiming that their position wins out because it avoids mistakes,
sceptics use a fallacious system of scoring. While they indeed make the
fewest errors of one kind, it is at the cost of proliferating those of
another kind. Once we look on this matter of error realistically, the
sceptic’s vaunted advantage vanishes. The sceptic is simply a risk
avoider, who is prepared to take no risks and who stubbornly insists on
minimizing errors of the second kind alone, heedless of falling into
errors of the first kind at every opportunity.

Ultimately, we face a question of value trade-offs. Are we prepared to
run a greater risk of mistakes to secure the potential benefit of an
enlarged understanding? In the end, the matter is one of priorities and
values—safety versus information, ontological economy versus cognitive
advantage, epistemological risk aversion versus the impetus to
understanding—weighing the negativity of ignorance and incomprehension
against the risk of mistakes and misinformation.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">The Deficiency of Scepticism</span>

The sceptic too readily loses sight of the purposes of our cognitive
endeavors. The object of rational inquiry is not just to avoid error but
to answer our questions, to secure <span
style="font-style:italic;">information</span> about the world. And here,
as elsewhere, “nothing ventured, nothing gained” is the operative
principle. Granted, a systematic abstention from cognitive involvement
is a surefire safeguard against one kind of error. But, it affords this
security at too steep a price. The shortcoming of that “no risk” option
is that it guarantees failure from the very outset.

It is self-defeating to follow the radical sceptic into letting
discretion be the whole of epistemic valor by systematically avoiding
the acceptance of anything whatsoever in the domain of empirical fact.
To be sure, when we set out to acquire information we may well discover
in the end that, try as we will, success in reaching our goal is beyond
our means. But we shall <span
style="font-style:italic;">certainly</span> get nowhere at all if we do
not even set out on the journey—which is exactly what the sceptic’s
blanket proscription of acceptance amounts to.

In “playing the game” of making assertions and laying claims to
credence, we may well lose: our contentions may turn out to be mistaken.
But, in a refusal to play this game at all, we face not just the
possibility but the certainty of losing the prize—we abandon any chance
to realize our cognitive objectives. A sceptical policy of systematic
avoidance of acceptance is fundamentally <span
style="font-style:italic;">irrational</span>, because it blocks from the
very outset any prospect of realizing the inherent goals of the
enterprise of factual inquiry. In cognition, as in other sectors of
life, there are no guarantees, no ways of averting risk altogether, no
option that is totally safe and secure. The best and most we can do is
to make optimal use of the resources at our disposal, to “manage” risks
as best we can. To decline to do this by refusing to accept any sort of
risk is to become immobilized. The sceptic thus pays a great price for
the comfort of safety and security. If we want infor-mation—if we deem
ignorance no less a negativity than error—then we must be prepared to
“take the gamble” of answering our questions in ways that risk some
possibility of error. A middle-of-the-road evidentialism emerges as the
most sensible approach.

To be sure, the sceptical challenge to the project of empirical inquiry
based on principles of cognitive rationality has a very plausible look
about it. Our means for the acquisition of factual knowledge are
unquestionably imperfect. Where, for example, are the “scientific
truths” of yesteryear—those earth-shaking syntheses of Aristotle and
Ptolemy, of Newton and Maxwell? Virtually no part of them has survived
wholly unscathed. And given this past course of bitter experience, how
can we possibly validate our <span
style="font-style:italic;">present</span> acceptance of factual
contentions in a rationally convincing way?

Against this background, the sceptic <span
style="font-style:italic;">seemingly</span> moves within the orbit of
rationality. But only seemingly so. Perhaps, no other objection to
radical scepticism in the factual domain is as impressive as the fact
that, for the all-out sceptic, any and all assertions about the world’s
objective facts must lie on the same cognitive plane. No contention—no
matter how bizarre—is any better off than any other in point of its
legitimate credentials. For the thoroughgoing sceptic there just is no
rationally relevant difference between “more than three people are
currently living in China” and “there are at present fewer than three
automobiles in North America.” As far as the cognitive venture goes, it
stands committed to the view that there is “nothing to choose” in point
of warrant between one factual claim and another. Radical scepticism is
an H-bomb that levels everything in the cognitive domain.

The all-out septic writes off at the very outset a prospect whose
abandonment would only be rationally defensible at the very end. As
Charles Sanders Peirce never tired of maintaining, inquiry only has a
point if we accept from the outset that there is some prospect that it
may terminate in a satisfactory answer to our questions. He indicated
the appropriate stance with trenchant cogency: “The first question,
then, which I have to ask is: Supposing such a thing to be true, what is
the kind of proof which I ought to demand to satisfy me of its
truth?”<sup>11</sup> A general epistemic policy that would, as a matter
of principle, make it impossible for us to discover something that is ex
hypothesi the case is clearly irrational. And the sceptical proscription
of all acceptance is obviously such a policy—one that abrogates the
project of inquiry at the very outset, without according it the benefit
of a fair trial. A presumption in favor of rationality—cognitive
rationality included—is rationally inescapable. It could, to be sure,
eventuate at the end of the day that satisfactory knowledge of physical
reality is unachievable. But, until the proverbial end of the day
arrives, we can and should proceed with the idea that this possibility
is not in prospect. “Never bar the path of inquiry,” Peirce rightly
insisted. And radical scepticism’s fatal flaw is that it aborts inquiry
at the start.

As Aristotle sagely observed, “Man by nature desires to know.” In this
cognitive sphere, reason cannot leave well enough alone, but insists
upon a continual enhancement in the range and depth of our understanding
of ourselves and of the world about us. Cognitive rationality is a
matter of using cogent reasons to govern one’s acceptance of beliefs—of
answering one’s questions in the best feasible way. But is this project
realizable at all? We must consider the sceptic’s long-standing
challenge that it is not. For, the sceptic—in his more radical moments,
at any rate—insists that there is never a satisfactory justification for
accepting anything whatsoever. By rejecting the very possibility of
securing trustworthy information in factual matters, scepticism sets up
a purportedly decisive obstacle to implementing these aims of reason.

Philosophical sceptics generally set up some abstract standard of
absolutistic certainty and then try to show that no knowledge claims in
a certain area (sense, memory, scientific theory, and the like) can
possibly meet the conditions of this standard. From this circumstance,
the impossibility of such a category of “knowledge” is accordingly
inferred. But this inference is totally misguided. For what follows is
rather the inappropriateness or incorrectness of the standard at issue.
If the vaunted standard is such that knowledge claims cannot possibly
meet it, the moral is not “too bad for knowledge claims,” but “too bad
for the standard.” Any position that precludes in principle the
possibility of valid knowledge claims thereby effectively manifests its
own unacceptability.

The sceptic’s argument is a double-edged sword that cuts both ways and
inflicts the more serious damage upon itself. It is senseless to impose
on something qualification conditions that it cannot in the very nature
of things meet. After all, it simply makes no sense to require us to do
more than the best that is possible in any situation— cognition
included. But rationality also conveys the comforting realization that
more than this cannot be required of us: we are clearly entitled to see
the best that can be done as good enough.

Scepticism surrenders from the very start any prospect of realizing our
cognitive purposes and aspirations. And on this basis, it runs counter
to the teleological enterprise to which we humans stand committed to in
virtue of being the sort of intelligent creatures we are. It is
ultimately this collision between scepticism and our need for the
products of rational inquiry that makes the rejection of scepticism a
rational imperative.<sup>12</sup>
