# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>Realism/Idealism</span>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Realism and Its Limits</span>

The position of metaphysical realism stands essentially as follows:

Reality is mind independent. We live in a world not of our own making, a
world whose constituents and their modes of operation are independent of
our thought. Thought and its machinations have no bearing on the
constituents and laws of nature, which are what they are independently
of the existence of thinking beings.

This sort of realism is not without its difficulties. One of its
limitations lies in the crucial distinction between <span
style="font-style:italic;">that</span> and <span
style="font-style:italic;">what</span>. For it is one thing to claim
abstractly and indefinitely <span style="font-style:italic;">that</span>
there is a domain of mind-independent reality, and something quite
different to make claims regarding <span
style="font-style:italic;">what</span> it is like.

In stating any descriptively concrete claims about the world’s
realities, we have no alternative but to employ man-contrived languages
and the thought-control ideas and concepts that they embody.

And leaving behind the self-subsistent realm of reality itself, we now
have to enter into the sphere of human beliefs about it. And here the
inherent nature of thought becomes unavoidable. The instruction, “Tell
me what is the case about something, really and truly, quite apart from
what you think and believe to be so” issues an inherently unmeetable
demand. Our only cognitive access to what there is proceeds through the
doorway of what we think to be so. Metaphysical realism, seen
abstractly, is all very well in its way, but when it comes to the
question of just what it is that we are being realistic about, it would
seem that we must be prepared to let idealism have its say.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Idealism and Its Modes</span>

Idealism, broadly speaking, is the doctrine that reality is somehow
mind-correlative or mind-coordinated. Bertrand Russell once said that
“idealists tell us that what appears as matter is really something
mental.”<sup>1</sup> But that is slightly stretching things. Idealism
certainly need not go so far as to maintain a causal theory to the
effect that mind somehow <span style="font-style:italic;">makes</span>
or <span style="font-style:italic;">constitutes</span> matter—let alone
that reality <span style="font-style:italic;">is </span>mental. This
oversimple view of idealism ignores such versions of the theory as, for
example, the explanatory idealism, which merely holds that an adequate
<span style="font-style:italic;">explanation</span> of the real is
unachievable in the absence of some recourse to the operations of the
mind.

A more modest and sensible idealism will merely have it that reality as
we understand it reflects the workings of the mind. And it will take
this to mean that the comprehending mind itself makes a formative
contribution not merely to our understanding of the nature of the real,
but even to the descriptive character that we attribute to it. Such an
idealism regards the natural world as a system that makes possible and
perhaps even probable the developmental pathway of intelligent beings
that can grasp the world’s modus operandi. Thought thus gains its key
position in reality not by virtue of the primacy of creating it, but
rather by virtue of the emergent saliency of its role in nature. And in
this light it is unjust to charge idealism with an antipathy to reality,
with ontophobia, as Ortega y Gasset called it. For it is not the <span
style="font-style:italic;">existence</span> but the <span
style="font-style:italic;">nature</span> of reality upon which idealism
sets its sights.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Conceptual Idealism</span>

The specifically <span
style="font-style:italic;">conceptual</span>—rather than
substantive—idealism that is now at issue maintains that any adequate
descriptive characterization of physical (“material”) reality must at
some point involve an implicit reference to mental operations—that some
commerce with mental characteristics and operations always occurs in any
viable explanatory exposition of “the real world.”<sup>2</sup> The
central thesis of this position is that the mind is responsible for
nature as we understand it, not, to be sure, by making nature itself,
but rather through its formative role in providing the mode- and
manner-determining categories in whose terms its conception is cast.
With such an approach, the constitutive role of the mind in nature is to
be thought of neither in ontological nor causal terms but
hermeneutically by way of concept explication. It is not that mind
produces nature, but rather that the manner of its conceptualization of
nature involves the analogy of mind; in sum, that we conceive of the
real in mind-correlative terms of reference.

Such a conceptual idealism’s central thesis is that the salient
characterizing properties ascribed to physical things in our standard
conceptual scheme are at bottom all <span
style="font-style:italic;">relational</span> properties, with some facet
of “the mind”—or of minds in general—serving as one term of this
relation. Specifically, it holds that the concept or scheme that we
standardly use to construe our experience ascribes properties and
characteristics to “material” objects that involve some reference to
mental operations within the very meaning of the terms at issue. Let us
consider how this is so.

Conceptual idealism is predicated upon the important distinction between
conceptual mind-involvingness and explicit mind-in-vokingness,
illustrated in the contrast between a book and a dream. To characterize
an object of consideration as a <span
style="font-style:italic;">dream</span> or a <span
style="font-style:italic;">worry</span> is explicitly mind-invoking. For
dreams and worries exist only where there is dreaming and worrying,
which, by their very nature, typify the sorts of things at issue in the
thought processes of mind-endowed creatures: where there are dreams or
worries, these must be mind-equipped beings to do the dreaming and
worrying. A book, by contrast, seems at first sight entirely nonmental:
books, after all, unlike dreams or worries, are physical objects. If
mind-endowed beings were to vanish from the world, dreams and worries
would vanish with them—but seemingly not books! Even if there were no
mind-endowed beings, there could certainly be naturally evolved
book-like objects, objects <span style="font-style:italic;">physically
indistinguishable from books as we know them</span>. Nevertheless, there
could not be books in a world where minds have no existence. For a book
is, by definition, an artifact purposively conceived, equipped with
pages on which “reading material” is printed. Such purposive artifacts
all invoke goal-directed processes of a type that can exist only where
there are minds. To be a book is to have <span
style="font-style:italic;">writing</span> within, not just <span
style="font-style:italic;">marks.</span> And writing is inherently the
sort of thing produced and employed by mind-endowed beings. In sum, to
explain adequately what a book is we must thus make reference to writing
and ultimately to minds.

The salient point here is not that the book is mentalesque as a physical
object, but rather that to explicate what is involved in characterizing
that object as “a book”—to characterize what it is to be a book—we must
eventually refer to minds and their capabilities, seeing that, given our
understanding of what is at issue, a book is by its very nature
something for people to read. A world without minds can contain objects
physically indistinguishable from our books and nails, but <span
style="font-style:italic;">books</span> and <span
style="font-style:italic;">nails</span> they would not and could not be,
since only artifacts created for a certain sort of intelligence-invoking
purpose can correctly be characterized as such. The status of those
objects as books or nails is mind-conducted. And so, while books—unlike
dreams—are not mental items, their conceptualization/characteriza-tion
must nevertheless be cast in mind-involving terms of reference. To be a
book is to be a thing that functions in an ineliminably mind-related
way. Books as such can only exist in mind-affording contexts.

This conception of the tacitly mind-involving (as contrasted with the
explicitly mind-invoking) will be central in these deliberations. For it
maintains that even the physical properties of things are themselves
mind-involving in the analytic sense that their explicative conceptual
unpacking calls for a reference to minds and their capabilities.

The pivotal thesis of conceptual idealism is accordingly that we
standardly think of reality in implicitly mentalesque terms. And this
contention rests on two basic theses:

-   1\. That <span style="font-style:italic;">our</span> world, the
    world as we know it, is—inevitably—the world <span
    style="font-style:italic;">as we conceive it to be</span>, and

-   2\. That the pivotal concepts (thought-instrumentalities) that we
    standardly use in characterizing and describing this world contain
    in their make-up, somewhere along the line, a reference to the
    operations of mind.

Observing that our “standard conception” of the world we live in is that
of a multitude of particulars endowed with empirical properties and
positioned in space and time and interacting causally, conceptual
idealism goes on to maintain that all of the salient conceptions
operative here—particularity, spatiotemporality, causality, and the
possession of empirical (experimentally accessible) properties—are
mind-involving in exactly the sense explicated above.

The most common objection to idealism in general centers on the issue of
the mind-independence of the real. “Surely,” so runs the objection,
“things in nature would remain substantially unchanged if there were no
minds. Had intelligent creatures never evolved on the earth, its
mountains and valleys would nevertheless be much as they are, and the
sun and moon remain substantially unaffected.” This contention is
perfectly plausible in one aspect, namely the <span
style="font-style:italic;">causal </span>one—which is just why causal
idealism has its problems. The crucial mind-independence of the real has
to be granted in the causal mode. But not in the conceptual mode. For
the objection’s exponent has to face the question of specifying just
exactly what it is that would remain the same. “Surely roses would smell
just as sweet in a mind-denuded world!” Well, yes and no. The absence of
minds would not change roses, but rose fragrance and sweetness—and even
the size and shape of roses—are all features whose character hinges on
such mind-invoking operations as smelling, scanning, comparing,
measuring, and the like. For something really to be a rose it must,
unavoidably, have various capacities to evoke mental responses—it must
admit of identification, specification, classification, and property
attribution, and these, by their very nature, are all mental operations.
Striking people as being rose-like is critical to qualifying as a rose;
if seemingly rose bushes performed strangely—say by sprouting geranium
like flowers—they would no longer be so: rose bushes just don’t do that
sort of thing. A rose that is not conceived of in mind-referential terms
is—not a rose at all.

Within the present confines, there is not room enough to tell the whole
story, so one key part of it will have to do. We still begin at the
beginning—particularity. So a base sketch will have to do. Thus,
particularity is a matter of identification, spatiotemporally a matter
of orientation, causality a matter of explanation, and property
possession a matter of description. And all of these are mind-involving
processes. All of these are implicitly mind-involving activities that
envision the world’s operations in terms of characteristically mental
processes. The world <span style="font-style:italic;">as we conceive
it</span> is a mental artifact that is constructed (in part) in
mind-referential terms—the nature of the world as we conceive of it
reflects the workings of the mind.

Of course, in speaking of mind-involvement or mind-invocation, no
reference to any particular mind is at issue. The operative mental
aspect here is not private or personal: it is not a question of <span
style="font-style:italic;">whose </span>mind—of this or that mind rather
than another. The dependence at issue is wholly generic and systematic
in nature.

In this way, then, conceptual idealism’s position is that the realm of
matter as we conceive of it is mind-involving. For it holds that our
standard conception of particular concrete objects—things located in
space and time and interacting with one another—is shot through with
mind-invoking involvements. But this entire argument that the mind is
basic for matter as holding in the conceptual order is based on the idea
that a mind-invoking conception is one whose ultimate analysis demands a
reference to minds or their capabilities.

And so, <span style="font-style:italic;">conceptual</span> idealism sees
the mind not as <span style="font-style:italic;">causal source </span>of
the materials of nature but as indispensably furnishing some of the
<span style="font-style:italic;">interpretative mechanisms</span> in
whose terms we understand them. It is predicated on the view that
reality as we standardly conceive it—in terms of material objects
identifiable through discernible dispositional properties, causally
interacting with one another in the setting of space and time—is thereby
unavoidably enmeshed with the operations of the mind. It maintains that
the mind understands nature in a manner that, in some ways, reflects its
own operations in fundamental respects—that we come to cognitive grips
with nature on our own terms, that is, in terms of concepts whose makeup
involves some reference to minds and their operations. The position
rests squarely on the classical idealistic doctrine that the mind
contributes essentially to the constitution—as well as the constituting—
of our knowledge of reality.

It is sometimes said that idealism is predicated on a confusion of
objects with our knowledge of them and conflates the real with our
thought about it. But this charge misses the point when a conceptual
idealism is at issue. Conceptual idealism’s thesis is not the trivial
one that what the mind makes is merely the <span
style="font-style:italic;">idea</span> of nature; it is not open to
Santayana’s complaint against Schopenhauer that “he proclaimed that the
world was his idea, but meant only (what is undeniable) that his <span
style="font-style:italic;">idea</span> of the world was his idea.” To
say that we can only obtain a view of reality via its representations by
the mind is true but trivial— we can only obtain a mind-provided view of
anything whatsoever. But to say that our view of reality (as standardly
articulated) is one that represents reality by means of concepts and
categories that are mind-referring in their nature is certainly not
trivial. And it is this position that is at stake in the conceptual
idealism that is now at issue. What is at issue is that mind-patterned
conceptions are built into our very idea of nature—that what this idea
involves is itself limited to mental operation.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Problems of Mind and Matter</span>

The following sort of objection against a conceptual idealism may well
be offered: “How can one sensibly maintain the mind dependency of matter
as ordinarily conceived, when all the world recognizes that the
operations of the mind are based on the machinations of matter?”
However, this objection simply gets things wrong. There just is no
question of any real conflict once the proper distinctions have been
drawn, because—as indicated above—altogether different sorts of
dependencies or requirements are at issue in the two theses:

-   1\. That mind is <span style="font-style:italic;">causally</span>
    dependent upon (that is, causally requires) matter, in that mental
    process demands <span style="font-style:italic;">causally</span> or
    productively the physical workings of matter.

-   2\. That matter (conceived of in the standard manner of material
    substance subject to physical law) is <span
    style="font-style:italic;">explicatively</span> dependent upon (that
    is, <span style="font-style:italic;">conceptually</span> requires)
    the mind, in that the conception of material processes involves
    <span style="font-style:italic;">hermeneutically</span> or
    semantically the mentalistic working of the mind.

We return here to the crucial distinction between the conceptual order,
with its essentially hermeneutic or <span
style="font-style:italic;">explicative</span> perspective upon the
intellectual exposition of meanings, and the <span
style="font-style:italic;">causal</span> order, with its <span
style="font-style:italic;">explanatory</span> perspective upon the
productive efficacy of physical processes. In the hermeneutic framework
of consideration, our concern is not with any facets of the causal
explanation of intellectual processes, but instead it is with
understanding these processes from within, on their own terms—in the
conceptual order. The issue is not one of <span
style="font-style:italic;">causal explanation</span> at all, but one of
<span style="font-style:italic;">understanding</span> achieved through
an analysis of the internal meaning-content of concepts and of the
semantic <span style="font-style:italic;">information</span> conveyed by
statements in which they are operative.

Because of the fundamental difference between these two perspectives of
consideration, any conflict in the dependency relations to which they
give rise is altogether harmless from the standpoint of actual
inconsistency. The circle breaks because <span
style="font-style:italic;">different</span> modes of dependency are
involved: we move from mind to matter in the conceptual order of
understanding (of <span style="font-style:italic;">rationes
cognoscendi</span> or rather <span
style="font-style:italic;">concipiendi</span>) and from matter to mind
in the ontologically dependent order of causation (<span
style="font-style:italic;">rationes essendi</span>). Once all the due
distinctions are duly heeded, any semblance of vicious circularity
disappears. No doubt, this calls for a certain amount of care and
subtlety—but then so do many issues of intellectual life and why should
things be easier in philosophy than elsewhere?

To some extent then, the conceptual idealist’s thesis is that one
specific direction of dependence (that of the physical upon that of the
mental) is built into the view of reality at issue in our standard
conceptual scheme. But this must not be seen as conflicting with the
debatable (but by no means thereby negligible) prospect that the
scientific explanation of causal relationships might envision a reversal
in the direction of dependence. Where different perspectives are
involved, seemingly conflicting theses are perfectly compatible. (I can
say without conflict that my car is economical in point of gas mileage
and uneconomical in point of maintenance costs.)

Yet even if no vicious circle arises, do we not arrive at an equally
vicious infinite regress that altogether precludes understanding. For is
understandability not precluded from the outset if an adequate overall
understanding of the mind requires reference to its causal origins in
matter, and an adequate overall understanding of matter requires
reference to its functional presuppositions of a mind-invoking sort? The
answer is negative. A problematic regress would arise here only if one
adopted an essentially linear model of understanding. But this is quite
inappropriate in the case of <span
style="font-style:italic;">coordinated</span> concepts such as the
present instance of mind/matter or the simpler case of cause/effect. To
say that we cannot fully understand the cause until we understand its
effect, and that we cannot fully understand the effect until we
understand the cause, is not to show that there is a vitiating regress
with the result that we cannot understand either one. All it shows is
that two such coordinated and interrelated concepts cannot be set out
through a <span style="font-style:italic;">sequential</span> explanation
but must be grasped <span style="font-style:italic;">together</span> in
their systematic unity.

A somewhat crude analogy may be helpful at this point. Take a knife and
its blade. If an object is to count as a knife, then the shiny thing
attached to the handle must be a blade, but this thing cannot count as a
blade unless the whole it comprises together with that handle is a
knife. The two items stand in conceptually symbiotic apposition: <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span> cannot be properly characterized as
<span style="font-style:italic;">X</span> unless it is duly related to
<span style="font-style:italic;">Y,</span> and <span
style="font-style:italic;">Y</span> cannot be properly characterized as
such unless it is duly related to <span
style="font-style:italic;">X</span>. We cannot pick up either end of the
stick without avoiding the other. We must grasp the whole in one fell
swoop. Just such a cognitive <span
style="font-style:italic;">coordination</span> of mentalistic and
materialistic concepts holds with respect to our present analysis of
their mutual interdependencies. But interdependency does not annihilate
difference, and by maintaining due distinctions, any collapse into
vicious circularity or vitiating regress can be avoided.

Conceptual idealism is thus even compatible with a causal materialism
that maintains matter to be basic to the mind in the causal order. On
the causal issues of the origins of the mind, conceptualistic idealism
is silent and so compatible with various theories—materialism itself not
excluded. Conceptual idealism just is not an <span
style="font-style:italic;">explanatory</span> theory regarding the
causal mechanisms of the mind’s processes or mode of origination; it is
an <span style="font-style:italic;">analytical</span> theory regarding
the nature of the conceptual mechanisms of the categories of
understanding. It can thus coexist with <span
style="font-style:italic;">any</span> theory of the mind that is
articulated along strictly <span
style="font-style:italic;">causal</span> lines—be it a Cartesian-style
dualism of reciprocal influence or even a unidirectional
epiphenomenalism.

The conceptual idealist accordingly has no vested interest in denying a
“scientistic” view that the mind and its functioning may ultimately
prove to be somehow causally emergent from the processes of matter. The
position does not need to be argued through an attack upon causal
materialism: it is quite compatible with the idea that mental
functioning has its material basis and causal origins in the realm of
physical processes. The doctrine’s point is simply that our standard
conception of the world—its material sector specifically included—is
forthcoming in terms of reference that are at bottom mind-involving. It
is the analytical issue of <span style="font-style:italic;">how we
actually think</span> of the world, not the operational issue of the
mechanics of its causal goings-on that constitutes the focus of concern.
Of course, any currently viable form of idealism has to make its peace
with science and come to terms with the world as the science of the day
depicts it. And in particular it must accept the theory of
evolution—cosmic and biological alike—and come to terms with a universe
that initially dispensed even with solid state physics (to say nothing
of chemistry, let alone biology). In such a universe, the emergence of
mind comes late in the day; mind is but a “Johnny-come-lately.” And this
too is something that a conceptual idealism can manage to take in
stride.

In sum, then, a cogent case can be made for holding that the familiar
objections to idealism—traditional and recent alike—can be defused when
one makes a shift from an <span
style="font-style:italic;">ontological</span> to the <span
style="font-style:italic;">conceptual-istic</span> version of the
doctrine, which, to all appearances, seems to offer the best prospect of
acceptability.
