# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>Intelligent Design</span>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Being Intelligently Designed</span>

Two key ideas guide the present discussion: (1) that there is a
substantial difference between being designed <span
style="font-style:italic;">intelligently</span> and being designed <span
style="font-style:italic;">by intelligence</span>, and (2) that
evolution, broadly understood, is in principle a developmental process
through which the former feature—being designed intelligently—can
actually be realized. The conjoining of these items means that, rather
than there being a conflict or opposition between evolution and
intelligent design, evolution itself can be conceived of as an
instrumentality of intelligent design.

To be intelligently designed is to be constituted in the way an
intelligent being <span style="font-style:italic;">would</span> arrange
it. To this end, it need certainly not be claimed that an intelligent
being <span style="font-style:italic;">did</span> do so. Being
intelligently designed no more requires an intelligent designer than
being designed awkwardly requires an awkward one.

At bottom, intelligent design is a matter of efficiency and
effectiveness in goal realization. But what can be said when the entire
universe is at issue? How are we to conceive of this matter of aims and
goals then? The crux of the matter is not afforded by the question,
“Does the universe have a goal?” but rather by the subtler, purely
conditional and <span style="font-style:italic;">strictly
hypothetical</span> question: “If we are to think of the universe as
having a goal, then what could it reasonably be?” The issue here is one
of a figuratively <span style="font-style:italic;">virtual</span> rather
than an actually <span style="font-style:italic;">literal </span>goal.

So to begin, we must ask whether or not it is reasonable to expect an
intelligent agent or agency to produce a certain result. Clearly, this
issue will depend on the aims and purposes this agent or agency could
reasonably be expected to have. And this leads to the question: “What is
it that one could reasonably expect regarding the productive aims and
purposes of an intelligent agent or agency?”

Now what would obviously have pride of place in the evaluative pantheon
of such an intelligence is intelligence itself. Surely nothing has
higher value for an intelligent being than intelligence itself, and
there is little that would be worse for a being than “losing its
reason.” Intelligence and rationality are the paramount values for any
rational creature: a rational being would rather lose its right arm than
lose its reason.

But of course a rational being will thereby only value something it
regards as <span style="font-style:italic;">having</span> value; it
would not value something that it did not deem valuable. Thus, it will
only value rationality in itself if it deems rationality itself to be
something of value. And so in valuing their rationality, truly rational
creatures are bound to value rationality in general—whenever it may be
found. The result of this will be a reciprocal recognizance among
rational beings—as such, they are bound to see themselves as the justly
proud bearers of a resource of special value.

Accordingly, the only response to the question of a goal for world
development that has a scintilla of plausibility would have to take the
essentially Hegelian line of locating the crux of intelligent design in
the very factor of intelligence itself. Implementing this idea calls for
locating the “virtual” goal of the universe within its providing for the
development of intelligent beings able to achieve some understanding of
its own ways and operations. One would accordingly inquire whether the
world’s nature and modus operandi are so constituted as to lead with
efficiency and effectiveness to the emergence of intelligent beings. Put
in technical jargon the question becomes: is the universe noophelic—that
is, intelligence friendly—in favoring the interests of intelligence in
the course of its development?

A positive response here has deep roots in classical antiquity—
originally in Plato and Aristotle and subsequently in the Aristotelian
neo-Platonism of Plotinus and Proclus. And it emerges when two ancient
ideas are put into juxtaposition—first, it is love that makes the world
go round, and the second is that such love is a matter of understanding,
so its crux lies in an <span style="font-style:italic;">amor
intellecualis</span> of sorts.<sup>1</sup> On this perspective,
self-understanding, the appreciation through intelligence of
intelligence, would be seen as definitive aim and telos of nature’s
ongoing self-development. Such a position is, in effect, that of an
updated neo-Platonism. And it represents a tendency of thought that
still has potential relevancy.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Nature’s Noophelia</span>

From this perspective, intelligent design calls for the prospering of
intelligence in the world’s scheme of things. But just what would this
involve?

Of course the emergence of living organisms is a crucial factor here.
And an organically <span style="font-style:italic;">viable</span>
environment—to say nothing of a cognitively <span
style="font-style:italic;">knowable</span> one—must incorporate orderly
experiential structures. There must be regular patterns of occurrence in
nature that even simple, single-celled creatures can embody in their
makeup and reflect in their operations. Even the humblest organisms,
snails, say, and even algae, must so operate that certain types of
stimuli (patterns of recurrently discernible impacts) call forth
appropriately corresponding types of responses—that such organisms can
detect structural patterns in their natural environment and react to it
in a way that proves to their advantage in evolutionary terms. Even its
simplest creatures can maintain themselves in existence only by swimming
in a sea of regularities of exactly the sort that would be readily
detectable by intelligence. And so nature must cooperate with
intelligence in a very particular way—it must be stable enough, regular
enough, and structured enough for there to be appropriate responses to
natural events that can be “learned” by creatures. If such “appropriate
responses” are to develop, nature must provide suitable stimuli in a
duly structured way. Nature must thus present us with an environment
that affords sufficiently stable patterns to make coherent “experience”
possible, enabling us to derive appropriate <span
style="font-style:italic;">information</span> from our structured
interactions with the environment. Accordingly, a world in which any
form of intelligence evolves will have to be a world whose processes
bring grist to the mill of intelligence. To reemphasize: <span
style="font-style:italic;">A world in which intelligent creatures emerge
in a natural and efficient way through the operation of evolutionary
processes must be a substantially intelligible world</span>.

But there is another side to it above and beyond intelligible order. For
the world must also be varied and diversified—it cannot be so bland and
monotone that the stimulation of challenge and response processes
required for evolution is not forthcoming. Evolution itself requires
that a universe containing intelligent creatures must be
intelligence-congenial: it must be just the sort of universe that an
intelligent creature would—if it could—endeavor to contrive, a universe
that is intelligently designed with a view to the existence and
flourishing of intelligent beings.

A world in which intelligence emerges by anything like standard
evolutionary processes must be a realm pervaded by regularities and
periodicities regarding organism-nature interaction that produces and
perpetuates organic species. And so, to possibilize the evolutionary
emergence of intelligent beings the universe must afford a manifold of
lawful order that makes it a cosmos rather than a chaos.

In sum then, a complex world with organisms that develop by natural
selection is not only going to be such that intelligent beings are
likely to emerge, but is, in fact, going to be an intelligently designed
world. Accordingly, four facts speak most prominently on behalf of a
noophelic cosmos:

-   • The fact that the world’s realities proceed and develop under the
    aegis of natural laws: that it is a manifold of lawful order whose
    doings exhibit a self-perpetuating stability of processual function.

-   • The fact of a course of cosmic development that has seen an
    ever-growing scope for manifolds of lawful order, providing
    step-by-step the materials for the development of the laws of
    physics, their theme of chemistry, their biology, their sociology,
    and so on.

-   • The fact that intelligent beings have in fact emerged—that
    nature’s modus operandi has possibilized and facilitated the
    emergence of intelligence.

-   • The fact of an ever-deepening comprehension and penetration of
    nature’s ways on the part of intelligent beings—their ongoing
    expansion and deepening of their understanding of the world’s events
    and processes.

And so, the key that unlocks all of these large explanatory issues
regarding the nature of the world is the very presence of intelligent
beings upon its stage. For if intelligence is to emerge in a world by
evolutionary means, it becomes a requisite that that world must be
substantially intelligible. It must comport itself in a way that
intelligent beings can grasp, and thereby function in a way that is
substantially regular, orderly, economical, and rational. In sum, it
must be the sort of world that intelligent beings would contrive if they
themselves were world contrivers, so that the world must be “as though”
it were the product of an intelligent agent or agency; although there is
no way to take the iffiness of that “as though” out of it.

In sum, evolutionary noophelia is a position for which there is
plausible basis of evidential substantiation. Intelligence too needs its
nourishment. In a world without significantly diversified phenomena
intelligent creatures would lack opportunities for development. If their
lifespan is too short, they cannot learn. If too long, there is too slow
a pace of generational turnover for effective development—a sort of
cognitive arteriosclerosis. Accordingly, nature’s own contribution to
the issue of the intelligibility of nature has to be the possession of a
relatively simple, uniform, and systematic law structure with regard to
its processes—one that deploys so uncomplicated a set of regularities
that even a community of inquirers possessed of only rather modest
capabilities can be expected to achieve a fairly good grasp of
significant parts of it.

On this line of deliberation, nature admits cognitive access not just
because it has laws (is a <span
style="font-style:italic;">cosmos</span>), but because it has <span
style="font-style:italic;">relatively simple</span> laws. And these
relatively simple laws must be there because if they were not, then
nature just could not afford a viable environment for intelligent life.
But how might an intelligence-friendly, <span
style="font-style:italic;">noophelic </span>world come about? At this
point evolution comes upon the stage of deliberation.

In order to emerge to prominence through evolution, intelligence must
give an “evolutionary edge” to its possessors. The world must
encapsulate straightforwardly “learnable” patterns and periodicities of
occurrence in its operations—relatively simply laws. A world that is too
anarchic or chaotic for reason to get a firm grasp on the modus operandi
of things will be a world in which intelligent beings cannot emerge
through the operations of evolutionary mechanisms. In a world that is
not substantially lawful, they cannot emerge. In a world whose law
structure is not in many ways rather simple, they cannot function
effectively.

There are many ways in which an organic species can endure across
generations—the <span style="font-style:italic;">multiplicity</span> of
sea turtles, the <span style="font-style:italic;">speed</span> of
gazelles, the <span style="font-style:italic;">hardness</span> of
tortoise shells, and the <span
style="font-style:italic;">simplicity</span> of microorganisms all
afford examples. But among these survival strategies, intelligence—the
resource of intelligent beings—is an adaptive instrumentality of potent
and indeed potentially optimal efficacy and effectiveness. So in a
universe that is sufficiently fertile and complex, the emergence of
intelligent beings can be seen as something that is “only natural” under
the pressure of evolutionary processes.

In sum, for nature to be intelligible there must be a coordina-tive
alignment that requires cooperation on both sides. The analogy of
cryptanalysis is suggestive. If <span
style="font-style:italic;">A</span> is to break <span
style="font-style:italic;">B</span>’s code, there must be due reciprocal
alignment. If <span style="font-style:italic;">A</span>’s methods are
too crude, too hit-and-miss, he can get nowhere. But even if <span
style="font-style:italic;">A</span> is quite intelligent and
resourceful, his efforts cannot succeed if <span
style="font-style:italic;">B</span>’s procedures are simply beyond his
powers. (The cryptanalysts of the 17th century, clever though they were,
could get absolutely nowhere in applying their investigative
instrumentalities to a high-level naval code of World War II vintage.)
Analogously, if the mind and nature were too far out of alignment—if the
mind were “too unintelligent” for the complexities of nature or nature
“too complex” for the capacities of the mind— the two just couldn’t get
into step. It would be like trying to rewrite

Shakespeare in a pidgin English with a five hundred word vocabulary or
like trying to monitor the workings of a system containing ten degrees
of freedom by using a cognitive mechanism capable of keeping track of
only four of them. If something like this were the case, the mind could
not accomplish its evolutionary mission. The interests of survival would
then have been better served by an alignment process that does not take
the cognitive route. And so, if the development of intelligent beings is
the aim, then evolution is a pretty effective means for its realization.
What we have is a hermeneutic circle in which evolution productively
explains the operandi of intelligence, while intelligence functionally
explains the operation of evolution.

And so, what evolution does by natural selection is to take some of the
magic out of intelligence—to help demystify that presence of
intelligence in the cosmos. It is no more surprising that nature
provides grist for the mind than that it provides food for the body. But
it manages to do this precisely to the extent that it qualifies as an
intelligently construed instrumentality for the realization of
intelligence.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Nature’s Nootropism</span>

Beyond the issue of the evolution <span
style="font-style:italic;">of</span> intelligence there is also that of
intelligence <span style="font-style:italic;">in</span> evolution.

The question from which we set out was: is the world so constituted that
its natural development leads with effectiveness and efficacy to the
emergence of intelligent beings able to achieve some understanding of
its modus operandi? And the answer to this question as we have
envisioned it lies in the consideration that a world in which
intelligent creatures emerge through evolutionary means—as ours actually
seems to be—is pretty much bound to be so constituted.

A universe designed <span style="font-style:italic;">by</span> an
intelligent being would accordingly be a universe designed <span
style="font-style:italic;">for</span> intelligent beings and thus be
user-friendly for intelligent beings. Their very rationality requires
rational beings to see themselves as members of a confraternity of a
special and particularly worthy kind. But what about rationality in
nature?

One would certainly expect on general principles that the nature’s
processes should proceed in a maximally effective way—on the whole and
with everything considered comporting itself intelligently, subject to
considerations of what might be characterized as a rational economy of
effort. And so, with rationality understood as being a matter of the
intelligent management of appropriate proceedings, we would view nature
as a fundamentally rational system. However, our expectation of such
processual rationality is not based on <span
style="font-style:italic;">personifying</span> nature but, to the
contrary, on <span style="font-style:italic;">naturalizing</span>
intelligence. For to say that nature comports itself intelligently is
not so much to model nature in our image as it is to position ourselves
within the manifold of processes that is natural to nature itself. Here
there is no projection of our intelligence into nature, but rather of
envisioning a (minute) manifestation of nature’s intelligence in
ourselves. Nature’s inclination to promote intelligence and its
interests—nootropism in short— is thus to be seen as perfectly <span
style="font-style:italic;">naturalistic</span>, an aspect of its
inherent modus operandi.<sup>2</sup> For in seeing its workings to
proceed <span style="font-style:italic;">as though </span>intelligent
agency were at work, we not so much conceive of nature in our terms of
reference as conceive of ourselves as natural products of the
fundamentally rational comportment of nature. Our rationality, insofar
as we possess it, is simply an inherent part of nature’s ratiotropism,
so that the result is not an anthropomorphism of nature but rather a
naturomorphism of man.

When desirable outcomes of extremely small probability are being
produced with undue frequency we can count on it that some sort of
cheating is going on.<sup>3</sup> And on this basis it would appear that
nature “cheats” by exhibiting a favorable bias towards the interests of
intelligence by functioning as to render an intelligence-favorable
result more probable than would otherwise be the case. Indeed the
noophelia that figures among rationality’s most basic commitments is
among the most striking features of nature’s modus operandi.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">A Naturalistic Teleology</span>

It would be a profound error to oppose evolution to intelligent
de-sign—to see them as somehow conflicting and incompatible. For natural
selection—the survival of forms better able to realize selfreplication
in the face of challenges and overcome the difficulties posed by the
world’s vicissitudes—affords an effective means to establishing
intelligent resolutions. (It is no accident that whales and
sophisticated computer-designed submarines share much the same physical
configuration or that the age of iron succeeded that of bronze.) The
process of <span style="font-style:italic;">natural</span> selection at
work in the unfolding of biological evolution is replicated in the <span
style="font-style:italic;">rational</span> selection we encounter
throughout the history of human artifice. On either side, evolution
reflects the capacity to overcome obstacles and resolve problems in the
direction of greater efficiency and effectiveness. Selective
evolutionary pressures—alike in natural (biological) and rational
(cultural) selection—are thus instrumentalities that selectively move
the developmental course of things toward increasing rationality.

Yet, why should it be that the universe is so constituted as to permit
the emergence of intelligence? Three possible answers to the problem of
nature’s user-friendliness toward intelligence suggest themselves:

-   • The universe itself is the product of the creative agency of an
    intelligent being who, as such, will of course favor the interests
    of intelligence.

-   • Our universe is simply one item within a vast multiverse of
    alternatives—and it just so happens (fortuitously, as it were) that
    the universe that we ourselves inhabit is one that exhibits
    intelligent design and intelligence-friendliness.

-   • Any manifold able to constitute a universe that is selfpropagating
    and self- perpetuating over time is bound to develop, in due course,
    an intelligence-favoring dimension. The same sort of selective
    developmental pressures that make for the emergence of intelligent
    beings <span style="font-style:italic;">in</span> the universe make
    for the emergence of an intelligent design <span
    style="font-style:italic;">of</span> the universe.

Note that the first and the last of these prospects are perfectly
compatible, though both explanations would be incompatible with the
middle alternative whose bizarre character marks its status as that of a
decidedly desperate recourse.

To be sure, if the world is intelligently designed there yet remains the
pivotal question: how did it get that way? And at this point there comes
a forking of the way into two available routes, namely: by <span
style="font-style:italic;">natural</span> means or by <span
style="font-style:italic;">super-</span> or <span
style="font-style:italic;">supranatural</span> means. There is nothing
about intelligent design as such that constrains one route or the other.
Intelligent design does not require or presuppose an intelligent
designer any more than an oddly designed reality would require an odd
designer. A naturally emerging object is not made into an artifact by
its possession of a feature whose artifice <span
style="font-style:italic;">might also</span> produce. Again, being
intelligently designed no more demands an intelligent designer than
saying it is harmoniously arranged requires a harmonious arranger or
saying it is spatially extended requires a spatial extender.

Against this background it would appear that there is thus nothing
mystical about a revivified neo-Platonism. It is strictly geared to
nature’s modus operandi. Insofar as teleology is at work, it is a
naturalistic teleology.

Here many participants in the debates about intelligent design get
things badly confused. Deeply immersed in a theism-antipathetic <span
style="font-style:italic;">odium theologicum</span> they think that
divine creation is the only pathway to intelligent design and thereby
feel impelled to reject the idea of an intelligently designed universe
in order to keep God out of it. They think that intelligent design can
only come to realization through the intermediation of an intelligently
designing creator. But this view sees matters askew. A perfectly natural
impetus to harmonious coordination could perfectly well fit in an
intelligently designed result. And so could the natural selection
inherent in some macroevolution-ary process.

The hypothetical and conditional character of the present line of
reasoning must be acknowledged. It does no more than maintain the purely
conditional thesis that <span
style="font-style:italic;">if</span>intelligent creatures are going to
emerge in the world by evolutionary processes, <span
style="font-style:italic;">then</span> the world must be ratiophilic, so
to speak—that is, user-friendly for rational intelligences. It is not,
of course, being argued that the world must contain intelligent beings
by virtue of some sort of transcendental necessity. Rather, a
conditional situation—if intelligence-containing then in-telligible—is
quite sufficient for present purposes. For the question at hand is why
we intelligent creatures present on the world’s stage should be able to
understand its operations in significant measure. And the conditional
story described above fully suffices to accomplish this particular job
in view of linking evolution and intelligent design.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Derailing Wastage as an Objection to
Evolved Design</span>

To be sure there can be objections. One of them runs as follows: “Is
evolution by variation and survivalist selection not an enormously
wasteful mode of operation? And is it not cumbersome and much too slow?
Does this sort of moving not rule intelligence out of it?”

Not really. For where the objector complains of <span
style="font-style:italic;">wastage</span> here, a more generous spirit
might see a Leibnizian principle of fertility at work that gives a wide
variety of life forms their chance for a moment in the limelight.
(Perhaps the objector wouldn’t think much of being a dinosaur, but then
many are the small children who wouldn’t agree.) Anyway, perhaps it is
better to be a microbe than to be a “Wasn’t that just Isn’t”—to invoke
Dr. Seuss. Or again, one person’s waste is another’s fertility—to invoke
Leibniz.

But what of all that suffering that follows to the lot of organic
existence? Perhaps it is just collateral damage in the cosmic struggle
towards intelligent life. But this is neither the place nor the time for
producing a theodicy and addressing the theological problem of evil. The
salient point is simply that the wastage objection is not automatically
telling and that various lines of reply are available to deflect its
impact.

Now, on to the charge of slowness. Surely the proper response to the
lethargy objection is to ask: what’s the rush? In relation to a
virtually infinite vastness of time, any finite initial timespan is but
an instant.

Of course there must be time enough for evolutionary processes to work
out. There must be <span style="font-style:italic;">sufficiency</span>.
But nothing patent is achieved by <span
style="font-style:italic;">minimality</span> unless there is some
mysterious collective reason why this particular benefit—an economy of
time—should be prioritized over other desiderata such as variety,
fertility, or the like.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Intelligent Design Does Not Require
Absolute Perfection</span>

Yet another objection arises along the following lines: “Does not
reality’s all too evident imperfection constitute a decisive roadblock
to intelligent design? For if optimal alternatives were always realized,
would not the world be altogether perfect in every regard?”

By no means! After all, the best achievable result for a whole will, in
various realistic conditions, require a less than perfect outcome for
the parts. A game with multiple participants cannot be won by every one
of them. A society of many members cannot put each of them at the top of
the heap. In an engaging and suspenseful plot, things cannot go with
unalloyed smoothness for every character.

Moreover, there are generally multiple parameters of positivity that
function competitively so that some can only be enhanced at the cost of
others—even as to make a car speedier we must sacrifice operating cost.

With an automobile, the parameters of merit clearly includes such
factors as speed, reliability, repair infrequency, safety, operating
economy, aesthetic appearance, road handling ability. But in actual
practice such features are interrelated. It is unavoidable that they
trade off against one another: more of <span
style="font-style:italic;">A</span> means less of <span
style="font-style:italic;">B.</span> It would be ridiculous to have a
super-safe car with a maximum speed of two miles per hour. It would be
ridiculous to have a car that is inexpensive to operate but spends
three-fourths of the time in a repair shop. Invariably, perfection—an
all-at-once maximization of every value dimension—is inherently
unrealizable because of the inherent interaction of evaluative
parameters. In designing a car you cannot maximize both safety and
economy of operation, and analogously, the world is not, and cannot
possibly be, absolutely perfect—perfect in <span
style="font-style:italic;">every</span> respect—because this sort of
absolute perfection is in principle impossible.

In the context of multiple and potentially competing parameters of
merit, the idea of an all-at-once maximization has to give way to an
on-balance optimization.

The fact of it is that every object of value will have a <span
style="font-style:italic;">plurality</span> of evaluative features, some
of which will in some respects stand in conflict. Where interest rots in
complexity, we sacrifice simplicity; where beauty lies in simplicity we
sacrifice complexity. And this being so, <span
style="font-style:italic;">absolute</span> perfection becomes, in
principle, infeasible. For what we have here is a relation of
competition and tradeoff among modes of merit akin to the complementary
relation of quantum physics. The holistic and systemic optimality of a
complex whole will require some of its constituent comportments to pay a
price. They will fall short of what they would be if abstractly
considered in detached isolation. This suffices to sideline the
objection: “If intelligent design prevails, why isn’t the world
absolutely perfect?”

The present discussion has argued that evolution is not at odds with
intelligent design, because the efficiency tropism inherent in the modus
operandi of evolutionary development actually renders it likely in an
intelligently designed product. Accordingly, evolution should not be
seen as the antithesis of intelligent design. Nor is it inimical to a
theology of an intelligent designer. In arranging for a developmental
pathway to an intelligently designed world, a benign creator could well
opt for an evolutionary process. So in the end, evolution and
intelligent design need not be seen as antagonistic.

In closing it must be stressed that noophelia can be entirely
naturalistic, but it is nevertheless altogether congenial to theism. To
be sure, there is no reason of necessity why a universe that is
intelligently designed as user-friendly for intelligent beings must be
the result of the agency of an intelligent being any more than a
universe that is clumsily designed for accommodating clumsy beings would
have to be the creative product of a clumsy being. But while this is so,
such a universe is altogether harmonious to theistic cosmogony. After
all, an intelligently construed universe is altogether consonant with a
cosmogony of divine creation. And so: <span
style="font-style:italic;">noophelia is not only compatible with but
actually congenial to theism</span>. After all, one cannot but think
that the well-being of its intelligent creatures will rank high in the
value scheme of a benign creator. As should really be the case in
general, approaches based on the study of nature and the reflections of
theology can here be brought into alignment.<sup>4</sup>
