# <span id="bookmark0"></span><span style="font-weight:bold;"><span id="bookmark1"></span>Mind and Matter</span>

<span style="font-weight:bold;">A Two-Sided Coin</span>

For centuries, issues of mind-matter interaction have preoccupied
philosophers, and recently modern science has added fuel to the fire.
But unfortunately, the interpretation of most science-inspired
theorizing about mind-matter interaction is hopelessly muddied through
misconstruing brain activity and the physiological gearing of the body
to mental thought, that the latter is somehow governed and determined by
the machinations of the former. Granted, there is a linkage with these
two resources operating in unison with the result of what one recent
writer refers to as:

The Correlation Thesis . . . to the effect that there exists for each
discriminable conscious state or occurrence \[in the <span
style="font-style:italic;">mind</span> of an agent\] a theoretically
discernable \[characteristically coordinate\] brain
correlate.<sup>1</sup>

For even if we grant such a rigid, lockstep coordination, there still
remains the question of who is in charge of a given transaction? Who
commands and who follows? Which is the dependent and which the
independent variable? Clearly, the tighter the coordination the more
pressing this questions becomes. Unison of operation will not as such
establish primacy of control. And this critical point is almost
universally overlooked. For causation is potentially a two-way street
here. Changes in psychological states carry changes in cerebral
physiology in their wake: when the mind frets, the brain buzzes. And
conversely, changes in brain states carry changes in mind states in
their wake. And the coordination of mind and matter—however tight—does
not put matter into the driver’s seat. One can think of mental activity
as a matter of the mind’s awareness of what the brain is doing. And
conversely, one can think of brain activity as the brain’s response to
or reflection of what the mind is doing. But there is no reason to think
of either of these alternatives as an inevitable arrangement, excluding
the prospect that sometimes the balance tilts one way or another.

In the end, any adequate mind/body theory must accommodate two facts of
common experience:

-   1\. The mind responds to bodily changes (drugs, fatigue,
    anesthetics, and so on).

-   2\. The body responds to many of the mind’s demands (to stand up,
    walk about, hold one’s breath, and so forth).

Now consider in this light the following oft-maintained contention:

An act can be free only if its productive source is located in the
thoughts and deliberations of the agent. But this is never the case
because the tight linkage of mind activity to brain activity means that
the thoughts and deliberations of the agent’s mind are always rooted in
and explicable through the processes at work in the agent’s brain.

To see what is amiss here, think of the classic freshman physics setup
of a gas-containing, cylindrical chamber closed off by a piston at one
end. The temperature inside the chamber is coordinated in lockstep
coordinate with the distance of the piston wall from the fixed wall:
when the piston moves the temperature changes correspondingly, and
conversely, when temperature changes are induced the piston moves
correspondingly. But this condition of functional lockstep correlation
leaves the issue of initiative wholly open: one may either be changing
the temperature by moving the piston or moving the piston by changing
the temperature. Thus lockstep coordination as such does not settle the
question of the direction of determination, which of the coordinated
variables is free and which is dependent. The fact that two parameters
are lockstep coordinated does not determine—or even address—the issue of
processual initiative.

Again, consider a teeter-totter or, alternatively, a pulley arrangement:
Here, the upward or downward motion of the one weight is inseparably
tied to the corresponding motion of the other.

<div>

<div>

![](main-5.jpg)

</div>

</div>

Lockstep coordination leaves totally open the issue of where the
initiative to change actually lies. And this illustrates

the larger point: however tight and rigid the functional coordination
between two interactive agencies—such as mind and brain—may be, the
issue of initiative and change-inauguration is something that yet
remains entirely open and unaddressed. Mark Twain’s tendentious
question, “When the body is drunk, does the mind stay sober?” is
perfectly appropriate. But then the reverse question, “When the mind
panics does the body remain calm?” is no less telling.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">The Issue of Initiative</span>

As previously mentioned, the connection between thought and brain
activity is simply immaterial to the issue of who is in charge. For what
is involved cannot settle the question of whether the mind responds
passively to brain-state changes, or whether it actively uses the brain
for its own ends.

Consider the following argument: “Our mental performances correspond to
physico-mental processes in the brain, which as such answer to nature’s
laws of cause and effect. Ergo those fundamental processes of inert
nature encompass the realm of thought as well.” There is a deep flaw in
this reasoning—a flaw that lies in a failure to realize that
correspondence and correlation do not settle the issue of initiative.
Irrespective of how tightly the operations of the mind are connected
with those of the brain, this does not establish—or even engage—the
issue of initiation, the question of whether it is the mind or brain
that is, what Moritz Schlick called, the “original instigator.”
<sup>2</sup>

There is good reason to see the mind-brain interlinkage in much the same
instigating terms. And here too, the linkage as such does not set a
fixed direction to the initiative and control of changes. Anger the
individual and characteristic patterns of brain activities will ensue;
create a characteristic pattern of activity in the brain (say by
electrical stimulus), and the person will respond with anger. Yes, there
indeed is a tight correlation, but productivity functions along a
two-way street. The correlation of the mind and brain is no more an
obstacle to thought-initiated physical responses than it is an obstacle
to the evocation through thought the responses of physical stimuli. My
annoyance at the pin-prick is a triumph of matter over mind; my
extraction of the pin a triumph of mind over matter.<sup>3</sup>

When my finger wiggles because I decide to move it, for the sake of
illustration, then the mind side of the mind/brain configuration sets
the brain side into motion. By contrast, when I hear the alarm clock
ring, it is the brain side of the mind/brain configuration that alerts
the mind side to a wake-up call. The mind/brain amalgamation leaves the
issue of the <span style="font-style:italic;">direction</span> of
motivation—be it brain-initiated mind receptivity or mind-inaugurated
brain responsiveness—open to further resolution. With agent causation
originating in the mind, the agent is active; with physical
considerations originating in the brain, the agent is passive. Both are
perfectly possible. And each happens some of the time with neither
enjoying a monopoly.

Mind clearly cannot do the work of matter: it cannot on its own produce
snow or ripen tomatoes. Nor, it would seem, can matter do the work of
mind: it cannot read books or solve crosswords. And yet the two are
clearly connected. When the mind decides to raise the hand, that hand
moves. And on the other side there is Mark Twain’s question introduced
above. Clearly, there is <span
style="font-style:italic;">interaction</span> here.

Mind-body coordination does not, as such, endow the brain with an
invariable initiative, but this is not the place to articulate a
fullscale philosophy of mind. The extensive detail of mind-brain
coordination will not preoccupy us here.<sup>4</sup> All that is
requisite for present purposes is that there is a tight linkage of
mind-brain coordination, and that when a state change occurs in this
context the initiative for it can lie on either side. We need not here
enter into detail at a level that transcends these rudimentary basics.

That said, it must be acknowledged that the conception of a mindbrain
partnership of coordination in which a process of a change in
psychophysical states can be initiated on either side is critically
important in the present context. For it opens the way to seeing free
decisions as a crucial, productive contribution of the mind to the
world’s panoply of occurrence.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">A Salient Duality</span>

What we have with mind-body coordination is not a mysteriously imposed
preestablished harmony, but an internally assured coestablished
alignment—a dual-aspect account if you will. Even as what is for the
paper a squiggle of ink is for the reader a meaningful word, so one
selfsame psychophysical process is for the brain a <span
style="font-style:italic;">signal</span> (a causal stimulus) and for the
mind a <span style="font-style:italic;">sign</span> (a unit of meaning).
Or again, one selfsame process, the ringing of the dinner bell, has one
sort of significance ever-obvious of the guests and another for their
mind-set. Such analogies, while imperfect, should help to convey the
general idea of phenomena that have an inherent duality. In our piston
example above, the mode of the piston manifests itself in changes of the
chamber area and heat-wise in a change of temperature.

That piston setup is a thermodynamic engine; the mind is a hermeneutical
engine. For only a mind can operate the symbolic processes that
transform stimuli into meanings. Those physical inclinations are the
<span style="font-style:italic;">occasion</span> and perhaps even in
some sense the <span style="font-style:italic;">productive cause</span>
of the interpretations at issue, but they are not the <span
style="font-style:italic;">bearers</span> of its substantive meaning
content. For that requires a very different level of understanding and a
very different framework of conceptualization.

All the same, the mind no more functions independently of the brain than
the expressive mood of the visage can smile Cheshire catlike without the
physical face. And yet, that physical face can achieve no expression in
the absence of there being a psychological mood to express.

Rigid materialism sees mental action as a systemically subordinate
response to the functioning of matter. Rigid idealism sees matter as
somehow engendered through the productive activity of mind. But more
realistic than either is a theory of mind-matter coordination that sees
the two as reciprocally conjoined.

With any system in which there are functionally coordinated factors (be
they temperature/pressure or supply/demand or whatever) a change in the
one can engender change in the other. What we have here, then, is a
situation of coordination and reciprocity rather than a case of
unidirectional dominance/subordination. Being anxious can make the pulse
race; but then again, sensing one’s pulse racing can induce anxiety. The
interconnection and interaction of mind and body can work both ways.
Granted, where the brain is dead the mind no longer works. But then as
long as the mind is working the healthy brain responds. Thought is not
an epiphenomenon to physical processes but a co-phenomenon coordinate
with certain ones among them. Thinking is not something the brain does:
it is done by a mind that uses the brain as <span
style="font-style:italic;">its</span> instrument.

When thought leads to action it is not that two different <span
style="font-style:italic;">kinds of </span>causality are at work. The
causality of agency (thought control) and the causality of nature (brain
control) are two sides of the same coin as it were, two inseparably
conjoined aspects of one comprehensive causal process. The changes at
issue flow from one unified sort of “causality.” It is just that the
actuating impetus to those changes in the one case lies at the pole of
thought processes and in the other case at the pole of brain processes.
And so when the mind has the initiative, the brain does not <span
style="font-style:italic;">react</span> but rather <span
style="font-style:italic;">responds—</span>and the converse is true as
well. So strictly speaking, rather than causality, influence is at work.
After all, a suggestion can induce or occasion an idea in someone’s mind
without “producing” it in some manufacturing analogous sense of the
term.

On the issue of who is in charge, the mind or brain, thought or matter,
traditional philosophizing has almost always taken an all-or-nothing
approach. Materialistic determinists from classical atomism to the time
of Hobbes, La Mettrie, and Laplace put matter in charge; idealists from
Socrates to Berkeley and Lotze put the mind in charge.<sup>5</sup> For
some reason the commonsense idea that in some transactions the one is in
control and in others the other had little appeal for philosophy’s
endless succession of absolutists. But in the end, there is really no
reason to opt for an all-or-nothing resolution.

<span style="font-weight:bold;">Mind-Brain Interaction Works by
Coordination, Not by Causality</span>

With mind-brain coordination in place, mind as well as matter can seize
the initiative with respect to human action so that we can act in the
mode of agent causality, while nevertheless all human actions can be
explained via natural causality. And so, we confront Kant’s paradox of
reconciling the two modes of causality.<sup>6</sup>

But how, with such a view, does mind come to exercise physical
causality? When I mentally decide to wiggle my fingers a few seconds
hence for the sake of an example, how is it that my body responds to
this purely mental transaction? The answer is that it doesn’t because no
“purely mental” transaction is at issue. Thought always has its
correlative in the domain of brain psychology.<sup>7</sup> And so, an
individual’s so-called purely mental intention is not really <span
style="font-style:italic;">purely</span> mental at all, because it is
coordinate with a mind-brain amalgamating, psychophysiological intention
state. And the physical cause of that wiggling response is not something
“purely mental” but the physical side of that amalgam.

What actually occurs in such transactions is less a matter of causality
than of coordination. In his classic paper of 1934, Dickinson Miller saw
the matter quite clearly:

\[In choosing or deciding\] the mental process is paralleled in the
brain by a physical process. The whole \[two-sided\] psychophysical
occurrence would then be the cause of what followed, and the psychic
side of it—the mental struggle proper—a concause or side of the
\[overall, two-sided\] cause. Tomorrow’s configuration of matter \[that
is, the physical result of an action\] will \[then\] have been brought
about by a material \[physical\] process with which the mental process
was inseparably conjoined.<sup>8</sup>

When an agent acts there is no need to dream up a Cartesian category or
a transcending impetus of thought upon matter. The material eventuations
are produced materially, by the physical side of the two-sided
mind-matter amalgam at issue in psychophysical processes. And the same
applies to thought processes. Each component functions in its own order,
but the coordinate linkage of the two move in lockstep, thus
automatically answering Mark Twain’s question introduced earlier, “When
the body is drunk, does the mind stay sober?” The one thing this account
leaves out—and it is a crucial omission—is the key, recurring point that
the actuating <span style="font-style:italic;">initiative</span> for
change can lie on either side.

But what could account for the fact that on this occasion the initiative
lies with the mind and on that occasion it lies with the brain? Here we
need to look to the temporal context of occurrence in its more
comprehensive gestalt. If what I do comes in response to drink or drugs,
then it is clearly the brain that is in charge. On the other hand if it
is a matter of careful deliberation and a painstaking weighing of
alternatives, then it is clearly the mind that is in charge. It all
depends on the structure of occurrence subject to the same sort of
contextual analysis that is at issue with the discrimination between
dependent and independent parameters in physical process situations. For
here as elsewhere, the wider context of occurrence can settle the
question of productive priority and initiative.

The causal deliberations of the ancient Greeks were predicated on the
idea that only like can cause like. The idea that factors that are as
different <span style="font-style:italic;">conceptually</span> as night
and day could nevertheless influence one another <span
style="font-style:italic;">causally</span> was anathema to them. But the
reality of it stands otherwise. Motion creates heat via friction; sounds
engender salivation by Pavlovian conditioning. Yet not only was this
consideration rejected by the Greeks, but it continued to exert
influence as late as Descartes, who continued with his Chinese wall
separation of mind from matter. However, the revolution in causal
thinking launched by David Hume changed all that. The idea of cross
category causation no longer seems all that odd to us. And we nowadays
do not—or should not—see any inherent impossibility that in the order of
causal production physical processes should engender mental
re-sponses—or the other way around.<sup>9</sup>

In the end then, regardless of how tight the correlation of mind and
matter may be, there is no ground for construing this circumstance as
precluding the efficacy of the mind in effecting change. Indeed, there
is no reason to refrain from maintaining that it is sometimes the mind,
rather than matter that affords the independent variable that takes the
initiative in the inauguration of change. The tighter the
interrelatedness of the brain and matter, then the ampler the prospects
become for transactions where the mind has the initiative. It is not
functional coordination as such that is the pivotal consideration but
rather the difference in the direction of the dependency at issue.

If the mind were “nothing but” the machinations of matter, if brain
psychology were <span style="font-style:italic;">all</span> there is to
it, then mind would be unable to accomplish its characteristic work of
providing a bridge for the domain of physical processes to the domain of
ideas. We would never get from here (<span
style="font-style:italic;">physicality</span>) to there (<span
style="font-style:italic;">thought</span>): all possibility of achieving
meaning, significance, and gaining information would be lost. Whoever
insists on seeing the mind as altogether “reduced” to matter thereby
excludes the conceptual domain.
